This afternoon, isn't it?
Afternoon, it's 1245 energy this
Afternoon. Oh, there we go.
Not that I'm counting down
to the long weekend or anything, but
Yeah.
Thank you, minister. So
when you're ready, we'll get started. Are you?
Thank you very much, she swell. Good
Afternoon. Have 45
minutes with you.
And if you would like to start with some opening remarks,
keeping them to around three minutes.
Thank you. I'll, I'll be happy to be short than that,
but, um, thank you first of all.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and to members
of the committee grateful to having this opportunity.
Um, I'm grateful as well to be joined, of course by, um,
MB Pop Brass and,
and, um, other suitable key figures, um,
on whom we'll call if, if, if need be.
With your permission. Um, Caroline Tain of mb of course,
no stranger to you, I'm sure as a committee
and indeed, um, public sector more generally.
Paul stocks like Weis, um, just wanna acknowledge him.
And, and, and the other teams have worked with,
the various teams have worked under, um, their leadership.
And certainly I've been really grateful in the last six
months since assuming this role to have the benefit
of their, uh, wisdom, insight,
and diligence as we've worked through a number of, um,
different, um, aspects of policy.
Um, of course it's a, it's a role in small business
and manufacturing that sort of sits across a number
of different, um, um, areas of the economy and
therefore including in interrelated with other, uh,
government ministers and work programs.
Um, I thought actually I would, um, just really briefly, um,
point out that, um, some of the key areas
of government focus is around, um, digitizing
and enabling the digitization of services, um,
from government and all the small businesses themselves.
Um, we think that's gonna be a helpful, uh,
move in a positive direction for the future.
So to the extent that, um, initiatives such
as the Digital Boost, um, and NZBN
or business number of course enable that, um, along
with e-invoicing and other ways
that we can create a digital environment
for small businesses to thrive,
um, that will be really helpful.
And then the final overarching note
before I hand back to you, Adam, chair and,
and see what areas of interest are to the committee members.
Um, I suppose I'd be remiss not to acknowledge
that there have been difficult times, of course,
in the New Zealand economy the last few years.
Um, and, um, while, um, the recovery, uh, will be patchy
by, you know, the inevitable nature of coming out
of economic doldrums.
Um, nevertheless, the recovery is underway.
Um, as recently as a couple of hours ago, we had the latest,
uh, quarter GDP figures, albeit for the first quarter,
so looking a little bit back in time,
but 0.8%, um, increase.
And some good news stories within that on the breakdown of,
of some of the sub-sectors including manufacturing.
Um, which admittedly, um, you know, has, um, had also other,
um, more recent economic news, um, over,
over the last week is, is, you know, under the category
of patchy as well in terms of economic recovery.
But overall, the signs are good
for a strong second half of this year and beyond.
And with that, I, uh, pass back to you, Madam Chair
and committee members and look forward to the discussion.
Thank you. Uh, we go to
Underwood. Thank
you. Um, and I've got a question on the,
on the manufacturing part of the portfolio.
So the manufacturing sector development procreation Yep.
Um, intended to lift productivity skills, performance
and growth of the manufacturing sector.
This has been cut and this year's budget,
it's been cut from 2.2 billion to 650, um,
to 650,000.
Uh, this reduction comes at a time when the economic outlook
for manufacturing is deteriorating
across a number of indicators.
BN Z's, um, business, new Zealand's performance
of manufacturing index.
The PMI, um, see, um,
showed there was sector reverse recent gains, um,
and the main details.
So why then, um, did you deliver a budget, um,
that cuts the appropriation that is supposed
to make productivity skills and growth and,
and preside over reducing this appropriation?
Yeah, I mean, there's a number of different ways
that we can look about, um, uh,
enabling and supporting the sector.
Um, you've identified one particular line item,
but that's given us opportunities to, um, uh,
support in other ways, um,
including supporting manufacturing, for example,
through the excellent work
of advancing manufacturing. L can
You just pull the microphone a little bit closer?
Oh, apologies. W within the budget,
obviously there are different opportunities to support, um,
manufacturing as, as well
as small business in a number of different ways.
Uh, and, uh, it seems to me that, um,
through supporting the work of advancing manufacturing,
lt oa, for example, uh, that we're unable to,
that we are able, excuse me, to, uh, ensure
that they are on, uh, a more productive path.
Um, obviously investment booth being a, uh, significant, um,
aspect of the budget will provide particular, uh, relief
and actually encouragement to, uh, to the,
uh, manufacturing sector.
And, uh, was pleasing that in the, uh,
very recently announced quarterly results for GDP, uh,
manufacturing as a subset within
that more general economic growth story, uh, was up by 2.4%.
So we are confident that things
are headed in the right direction,
Um, Subary and of course since the GDP figures,
we've had another under other indicators that showed,
despite those gains that showed up in the GDP figures,
that actually there's some significant
headwinds for manufacturing.
A more recent data would actually show declines.
Um, and that's data that's been released this week.
You spoke of investment boost, um, being the way
through instead for, for lifting productivity skills,
performance, creating jobs,
and growing the manufacturing sector.
Uh, treasury's own analysis shows investment boost,
while we are broadly supportive of the approach,
but it's 1% growth over 20 years,
1.5% growth in employment over 20 years.
Um, so what, uh, as minister are you doing
to support our manufacturing sector
besides delivering budget cuts to them?
Yeah. Well, I mean, there are a number of different things
that are helpful for the manufacturing sector.
Um, the, um,
Siri program has been really useful and helpful.
So, um, with a hundred manufacturing outfits
that have benefited from those, um, assessments of processes
and the way that, um, the factory floor operates to,
to be able to do that in a more efficient
and productive way, that's been really useful.
Um, in terms of where that program is now, um, the advice
that I've received is that there's a reduced, um, uh, desire
or uptake, um, for that.
So it made sense, uh, to me to, uh, make sure that we, um,
have money spent to the benefit
of the manufacturing system in, in, in other ways.
Um, for example, um, uh, attracting
and retaining talent, um, access to capital is, is a, is a,
um, bug bear, if you will, albeit that
that's not within my ministerial remit to be able
to control, um, settings that and,
and let alone commercial decisions
that individual banks might make.
Um, but certainly there are, um, a range
of initiatives including that digitizing of government,
which will, uh, benefit manufacturers, um, among others, um,
that we think will, um,
see New Zealand manufacturing on a solid
footing going forward.
Thank you. And supplementary, I just, um, wonder
what conversations, um, that any, if you could, um, talk
to the committee about conversations
you've been having with your colleagues.
'cause it's not only your vote that's delivered, um, a cut
to funding for manufacturers in New Zealand,
particularly in the energy portfolio, the cuts
to eco funding, uh, to support businesses, um,
to access cheaper electricity of also happened there.
So what conversations have you been having
with ministerial colleagues
around the dwindling support this government is giving
to our manufacturers?
Well, I mean, obviously I
wouldn't characterize it as that.
Um, in terms of conversations with ministerial colleagues,
um, obviously they're well aware, um, as, as clearly you are
and everyone, um, um, who's connected with, um, uh,
manufacturing and,
and energy in this country is
that we've got really challenging times economic security,
economic resilience, um, power costs is a situation
that we've inherited as a government, um,
that we know we need to resolve.
And ministerial colleagues are working hard on that.
Um, but in terms of conversations across government more
generally, um, I've worked closely with the Minister
for Immigration around, um, the importance
of balancing the need of course for young Kiwis
and mid-career Kiwis who want to change
and move into manufacturing.
Um, and, and, and knowing that the attractiveness of
that sector is an important element,
but also where gaps do exist, um, that it's necessary
for skilled migration to fill some of those gaps, um, on,
um, you know, on a secondary basis admittedly, um,
but also noting that, um, skilled migration can fill gaps
to keep the lights on in factories, um,
and also can assist to train, um, young Kiwis.
So, uh, a recent announcement that I made jointly
with the Minister for Immigration, for example, highlighted
that, um, some fabricators, uh,
and, uh, welder type jobs, um, would be, you know,
explicitly recognized in terms
of their strategic significance
for New Zealand manufacturing.
Thanks. And just another, another sub on that, um,
Doug Steele, the senior economist for the BNZ has, um, said
that the, in, um, the, the, the PMI, so the Performance
of Manufacturing Index is yet another indicator
that suggests an Inca increased risk in that balance in G
to GDP could come to a grinding halt.
So I imagine it's these kind of commentators
that would've been guiding your thinking, um,
while you were putting together your budget bids.
Beside, um, what other bids, um, did you consider
or support for the manufacturing sector other than
delivering a 1.5, a $1.5 million cut
to the, to the appropriation
that supported the manufacturing sector?
Yeah, I mean, I'm interested in bank economists,
of course, and of course the actual real world implication
that bank, um, policies and lending decisions might make.
So in terms of any banks who, um, are keen
to express a view on this, um, I would encourage them to be,
um, more forward looking
and frankly, more helpful to New Zealand small business
and manufacturing sector than many in those
sectors feel that they have been.
Obviously that's not a decision I can make
for banks in terms of their lending decisions.
Um, and to the extent that Reserve Bank
of New Zealand rules might, um, help to influence
that decision making, again, that's not, um,
within my remit, uh,
but certainly in terms of a view that, um,
that there is a risk around manufacturing
or anywhere else in the economy
that simply goes to prove the point.
Um, and it's a point well made by, you know, that gentleman
and, and any, anyone else who might care to weigh in that,
um, you know, we need to be mindful of the need
to boost productivity and
profitability for New Zealand firms.
Um, and that's why policies such as investment boost, um,
and other initiatives that are making it easy
to do business in this country announced
by other ministerial colleagues, um, are helpful
and we need to continue in that direction.
So thank you. So the manufacturing sector
development, uh, um,
appropriation doesn't have performance measures attached
to it because it's such a small appropriation.
Um, but in terms of what your expectations
around measuring, um, the success of the,
the less than a million dollars you're putting in
to support the manufacturing sector,
how will you be ascertaining whether
or not that's been a success?
Well, I, I would say that, um, there are ways
of supporting a sector that, um,
aren't reflected in one specific budget item
to the exclusion of all others.
But of course, there are ways of supporting a sector that,
um, sit outside, um, the provision of government funding.
I mean, there, there are ways, um, for example,
that we can support an industry that says, um, we want
to be able to get on with doing business in a way
that is not constrained unduly by government.
And so the work that has been done in other areas, uh,
for example, in relation to health
and safety, um,
whereby relatively low risk small businesses, um, need not,
um, uh, comply with the full weight of regulation
that others that are in genuine high risk occupation type
areas, um, need to comply with.
So it's a risk, uh, proportionate, um, approach,
and that's one way that we can support them.
But, uh, certainly in terms of, um, the data that indicates,
um, that manufacturing has had a much
better time of it lately.
Um, while admittedly, as you've, um, pointed out,
and as I had already in fact proactively acknowledged, um,
other data within the last, uh, week, um, relating
to the most recent monthly PMI stats, uh, would indicate,
um, a slowing, uh, as a one-off monthly data point compared
with more recent, uh, figures that have shown several months
of positive growth following two years of negative growth.
In fact, you know, a manufacturing recession
before even the rest of the economy was in recession, um,
shows that overall the path is up.
Uh, and we're really pleased to be able to support that
as a government in all the ways
and not just merely appropriation in the government to feel
as though we're achieving something, whereas, in fact,
the real world indications might be to the contrary.
Hold on, hold on, hold on. Uh, supplementary from Dr.
Ham. Thanks. Thank you. Thank you, minister.
And actually, we heard, heard loud back, uh,
that there's a huge decrease in energy prices.
Um, so I think there's, there's as, as you alluded,
there's many things that the government's doing
to help manufacturing.
Yeah. What feedback have you heard from manufacturers
around investment boost?
Yeah, I mean, I've had really good feedback
and actually, um, the important point to note there, and,
and I do wanna acknowledge the sector
for advocating over a number of years, um, to success
of governments, including my
predecessor within this government.
Um, but, but with the likes of, um, advancing manufacturing,
having provided some good leadership, um, they, uh,
that's a body that interacts closely with the sector, um,
along with the, uh,
manufacturing productivity advisory group.
Just spell out the acronym, slowly for my own benefit, um,
impact as it's affectionately known, uh, along
with sba Small Business Advisory Group.
Um, and, um, it was, uh, calls that had been made from
that quarter that actually encouraged the government,
you know, among others, um, to, uh, uh, to,
to understand the benefit for manufacturers particularly,
uh, of, um, of, of needing to promote ways of, uh,
encouraging investment uptake as compared with, for example,
um, a change in the corporate tax rate,
which obviously would be, you know,
beneficial in other ways,
but wouldn't necessarily have that immediate hit of, um,
promoting, um, uh, productivity
through the stimulatory measure of investing in plant
and equipment and so on.
Um, and I do just wanna, with your indulgence, uh,
Madam Chair, I'll try and crowbar into this answer.
The aspect that, um, clearly the, the member I was, um,
discussing previously with didn't, didn't feel I addressed.
Um, you know, there are a number of different measurements,
um, that we can make.
But in terms of growth of GDP, um,
as we've seen most recently in the quarter,
just announced 2.4% in positive territory,
um, is a great indicator.
And I couldn't think of a better way of, of describing, um,
you know, an out outcome that we want to achieve regardless
of other ways that you could slice
or dice, you know, data within,
within the manufacturing sector.
Good. Uh, is that a new one
or a, uh, probably, uh, sorry, a supplementary
Supplementary, yeah, supplementary Scott with us.
Um, so we've certainly, he heard from the government
that it's going for growth,
but in relation to, um, my colleagues'
suggestion that energy prices are going down,
we've heard from business Canterbury
that they've seen energy prices gone up, have gone up
by a hundred percent for some businesses over the past year,
and we've got business liquidations at a 10 year high
with 2,500 companies folding last year.
This is something that is exceptional.
So what I'm, what I'm really interested in is not, not
what is hopeful,
but what are the concrete actions
that this government is doing to ensure we have a strong
both small business and manufacturing sector.
What, what are the concrete actions?
And it, and it that some of those actions may fall
outside the, the, the minister's brief,
but I'm, I'm, I am interested in, in
what the minister is doing
and how, how the ministers is engaging with his colleagues
to make sure that we do have a thriving business,
small business and manufacturing sector.
Yeah. Um, thanks, thanks very much for the question.
Um, and you know, it's important
that we do have downward pressure on energy prices.
And, and to the extent that that's been, um,
not only not within my remit as you've noted,
but also thrashed out, I think as recently
as today in a select committee environment in, in the,
in equivalent hearing, um, you know, I'd, I'd be, um,
probably, um, impudent to, to try
and cut across that with my own, um, uh, translation
of those, um, measures and discussions.
Um, but in terms of ways that we can, um, assist, um,
businesses, I mean, some of it's about
a flexible labor market.
Some of it's a sensible level of regulation, including
as to health and safety laws.
But obviously acknowledging that, you know,
we have protections for workers, um, both in the sense
of health and safety and employment terms for a reason.
And, and, and it's important that we, um,
achieve a sensible level of regulation such
that the business, um, environment has, um,
certainty attached to it.
Um, and really, and I,
and I know it's not as satisfying in exchange in this kind
of hearing, um, as, as perhaps you're after, um,
and as any, um, member of a committee will always want, um,
to achieve, you know, in terms of a headline or a,
or a colorful or a, um, crisp statement from a minister.
But really and truly the fundamentals of the macro economy
around, um, inflation being within that statutory band
of one to 3%, um, that the, uh, BNZ is mandated, uh,
to achieve, um, OCR cuts, then being able to be delivered,
that will have a stimulatory effect.
And are in terms of, um, business growth confidence,
consumer confidence, obviously needing to flow through
to buy the goods and services that they produce.
Um, so I think it's a lot
of things all working together in conjunction.
Um, and I mean, obviously I've talked about the digitization
of, of government and,
and the way that we can promote better cash flow through,
um, mechanisms such as e-invoicing, both in terms of, um,
enabling and encouraging and promoting
that in a leadership kind of way to small business
and large businesses as well,
but also government as a procure of services committing
to pay through that, um, methodology,
but also in a much faster way
through its procurement systems.
Mm-hmm. And just to quickly
Follow, so just, I just want to say to the, uh,
two members that we try
to stay within this vote that would be useful.
Thanks.
And, and to the minister's point that we, we want
to ensure business confidence, we are seeing,
there's something like 23,000 more people on job seekers,
48% of workers got a pay cut in real terms last year, we,
we are seeing, we're seeing our working, our,
our workers heading over to Australia.
This doesn't seem like the type of environment
that would assist with business confidence
and would, would, would help our businesses thrive
or build that capacity.
What is the, what is the government doing
to ensure we have the workforce that we need?
Yeah, I mean, a good question about workforce.
Um, I mean, again, I emphasize that we've, um,
inherited a difficult set of economic conditions,
but, um, in terms of workforce, obviously it's important
that I continue to liaise closely with my colleague,
penny Simmons being the minister responsible
for vocational education,
therefore shaping the post tea P world.
Um, the key aspect there in terms of industry is that, uh,
those who are, um, you know, physically making things or,
or working in, um, fields like construction, um,
have a voice at the table
through those industry skills boards whereby, um,
the setting of standards, the content of the, um,
education programs
and the delivery of the programs must be closely connected
with industry so that, um, the, um, educational, um,
aspect is closely linked
to the real world outcomes that the industry needs.
And I think if we can get that right in conjunction
with the, um, broader mac macroeconomic settings
that I've described, then we'll have fewer
of our young people leaving for Australia, which, you know,
acknowledges, um, an issue that, you know, we're all, um,
keen to avoid seeing exacerbated,
Uh, supplementary from Dr. Ning.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, you mentioned in your, um,
earlier answer just recently about e-invoicing,
and I just wonder if you could, um,
elaborate a bit more about how that's going,
what the uptake's been like and what we're seeing there.
Yeah, I mean, thanks for that.
I mean, e-invoicing, um, is, um, an important way of, um,
promoting, um, productivity.
Um, and if you think about the mechanics of paying in a way
that's electronic and,
and we're not talking about, you know, um, sending of, um,
PDFs by email, it's actually much more sophisticated.
And, and, and more to the point, straightforward and simple
and quicker than that, but also the avoidance of fraud.
And if you think about the difficulty in the system when
fraud occurs, but also the chilling effect
that the possibility of fraud has in terms of,
um, payment processes.
And certainly from a government point of view, um,
not only do we wanna see the uptake broad across the economy
with the potential for $4.4 billion worth of, um,
productivity gains over the next 10 years as
as the official calculation, um, you know,
and that might be conservative,
it might also be slightly over,
but in any case, it's a good news story.
You know, several billions of dollars worth of, um, gain in
that aspect would be huge.
Mm-hmm. Um, and if you think about, um, government able
to show a leadership role procuring $50 billion worth
of services annually, um,
and so our procurement rules, um, are going
to reflect the importance of e-invoicing and,
and, um, promptness of payment, not only in terms of, uh,
the government governments are committing
to paying those from whom it procures the services promptly,
but also, um, requiring that those who, um, are
what we might call a prime contractor
to government also in turn, um, pay promptly, um,
those whom it's subcontracts.
So, so payment terms no less favorable
for those almost inevitably medium
and smaller businesses who are, you know, part
of the food chain, part of the local economies
that support those communities.
So that's why e-invoicing and, and
and general promptness of payment is so important.
Yeah. Alright. I could just add a little bit to give, um,
a little bit more data around that.
Uh, in April this year, uh, we had 51,000 businesses
registered for e-invoicing,
and we had over, over 275,000 invoices sent,
uh, through e-invoicing channels.
And I think, um, what has, um,
been evident across this year is as we've had, uh,
companies like Bunnings, uh, working
with the government on moving to e-invoicing,
it is actually starting
to really show quite a lot of growth.
Um, we did a comparison with colleagues in, uh, Norway on a,
at a adoption of e-invoicing,
and we are a little behind where, where they were,
but actually, uh, the amount of time
that we have been working on this piece of work, uh,
we are actually a little ahead of the uptake levels
that they experienced in Norway.
So I'm actually really optimistic about this, um,
because anything that's saved here goes directly
to the bottom line of manufacturing companies
or small businesses.
Great. Mm-hmm. Uh, supplementary from, uh, under,
Thank you. Um, just
wanna go back, you, you talked about the,
in a previous answer, you talked about some
of the skills work last year at estimates.
I'm not sure whether you were the minister No.
But last year, um, the minister talked about how the money
that had been cut from the advanced manufacturing ITP, um,
was going to be applied to, um,
go towards implementing the manufacturing workforce planning
recommendations in supporting regional programs
to connect students to manufacturing businesses.
Has that occurred, is the first question.
Um, obviously without knowing the context
of those remarks, I, I don't wanna, um, misspeak in
that space, but I can say, um, that, um, initiatives to, um,
um, achieve those kinds of aims, um,
very much are still alive.
And, for example, in the Waikato, um, a, a partnership with
between advancing, um, manufacturing and,
and the local entity, um, under the name of u as you learn,
is providing good results for young people to get, um,
interested and engaged and involved
and ultimately employed in this kind of space.
So, um, that kind of work continues
and while the, the industry transformation plan doesn't
exist, um, in that form, uh, nevertheless the opportunity
to remain connected to the sector
and get the insights directly to the minister,
but also, you know, with colleagues from MB
through the manufacturing productivity advisory group
and small business advisory group, both
of whom I'm meeting next week, um, you know,
and provide some valuable insights, um, in a way
that was probably contemplated
and to be fair, may have also been achieved
through those ITPs.
And I'll just pause if I may only
'cause I did, I think you were gonna say something,
You're entirely correct.
So the previous minister's comments were relating
to the work that was gonna be delivered through the ama.
Yep. That was done. Okay. So that was the intent.
So I'm right to assume then
that there is a long term action plan to support the,
the workforce sector development.
So, so the a MA have an action plan,
it's an industry led one, uh,
and the money that was used last year was for those, uh, uh,
uh, particular parts as the most said,
the connecting students to manufacturing.
But, so that's the only component
That was the deliverable last year.
Okay. The a MA themselves as the industry body is the one
that sets their work program. Yeah.
Right. Uh, do you primary? Yep.
I'm thinking minister
of the 400,000 sole traders in New Zealand, um,
there's a number of things in the government's work program
that will, um, require them to make administrative changes
to adopt, um, some different parts of their business
that will be costly to them.
One of those things is the company's ACT review
that's going on at the moment might make some changes
for them, but one of those things, these changes
to KiwiSaver that the government has made, um,
where we had a spokesperson from, I think it was, uh,
the CEO of Henry, um, saying that there was a risk to those,
um, businesses to have those changes.
How are you advocating for small businesses, um,
in adopting the changes
that government are putting onto them, um, to be, you know,
to have to meet those obligations in the next year?
Yeah, I mean, a, a great question
focusing on small traders because, um, I think it's,
it's either 71 or 72% of, um,
the 97% on turn of, um,
businesses in New Zealand that could be categorized
as small businesses are sole traders.
Um, I'm really mindful, including with the benefit
of a discussion with the gentleman who you've, um,
referenced, um, heading the Henry um, uh, business,
which provides great services, um, to, uh, you know,
to small businesses including sell traders.
Um, it's, it's, it's become clear to me that, uh, we need
to avoid adding any unnecessary red tape
that which has a disproportionate effect on relatively small
and even micro businesses that cannot be justified in terms
of health and safety or employment
or other, um, in terms, uh, of, um, changes.
However, that would increase transparency, um,
through the companies Act, which has been led
by a ministerial colleague and, and in which I won't
otherwise comment.
Um, I would say that, you know,
naturally we have an evolving landscape,
and it's important that where we can make gains, uh,
for the way that people operate efficiently
and transparently for, for their benefit,
but also those with whom they do business, um, you know,
that it's important that government continues to, um,
consider how those can evolve as long as we are mindful and,
and I certainly am, and,
and make sure other ministerial colleagues are as well, um,
on the effect of small businesses,
Were small businesses consulted when the Kiwi changer
KiwiSaver changes were moed.
Uh, that's not within my, uh, realm in terms
of the KiwiSaver, so I can't speak to the, what,
what consultation took place, but,
but know that in terms of, um, all the, um, taxation
and other revenue related measures, um,
these are conversations that are proactively raised
with me when I, um,
embark upon my many different visits around the country.
Um, and sometimes this is just initiated, um, by, um,
a Chamber of commerce or an economic development agency
under their own team, but sometimes it's more particularly
because they have a role
as regional business partner network, um, uh, partners.
Um, and, and through that RPB program, as it's known
through mb, um, the work that they do along with that
of business mentors is really valuable
because it provides an ongoing connection, um, to government
as well as of course, the provision of services
to people in those respective areas around New Zealand
who can get advice and support on,
on all these matters. Um,
Just one more. Do you anticipate,
um, costs added
to small businesses from the companies that review when Most
of the things out for consultation now are things like
shared buyback schemes, um, useful things
that are not in the standard cons, um,
constitutional template for companies,
but are not included in those.
And so should be, but those won't affect small business
owners, but small business owners will be affected
by things like, um, needing a, uh, separate set of numbers,
um, the way that they register their addresses will change,
so they will have to comply, um,
with another set of registrations.
How do you, what is the feedback you're getting from small
businesses who are looking at this and thinking, I,
I thought we were getting red tape cut.
Yeah, I mean, the, the key point there is
that government needs good navigable systems so
that when you have changes, even if they are, um, you know,
perfectly justifiable in terms of increasing productivity
and product profitability, nevertheless, small businesses
among others do need to understand how best
that should apply to them in their business.
It's a really good resource, uh, website known
as business dot Go vt do nz, which you might be aware of,
huge, um, range of different resources there, including, um,
content, um, along the lines of the digital Boost, um, uh,
efforts that were, you know, um, uh, generated actually lots
of views and increasingly so I'm reliably informed
that within the last month, um,
those have increased sevenfold in, in recent times.
Um, so lots of good resources there.
And also in terms of making it easier to do business, um,
initiatives like broadening the New Zealand business number,
so a single digital, um, uh, fingerprint
or footprint, um, some kind of print anyway, um, that,
that enables businesses and, um,
and potentially other kinds of entities in the future
as well, to interact with governments so
that they're not dealing in a siloed way
with different government agencies having to justify them
or explain themselves, um, from scratch on every occasion.
So those are, are productivity gains in the digital
environment, and also more generally, to that point
that you've made about navigability of, of existing or,
or new rules, um, is, is, is a lot of the feedback
that we get about how they want us to be able to, you know,
help 'em do, do their work.
So just members, I just want to say that there is a bit
of overlap going on here with the finance
and also commerce and consumer affairs.
So just bring it back to this board. Uh, a
Do you expect any changes, uh, for the small businesses
that operate, um, not only as sole traders,
but also trusts, um, incorporated societies, the things
that are not companies
but might need further registrations like numbers and
therefore would need to comply with the number set of rules?
Um, I, I, I think I understand your question and,
and if I have correctly then, um, I, I'm, I'm not able
to advise any particular changes in relation
to those entities, um, to the extent
that they're carrying on business.
Um, you know, obviously there'll be, um, strong engagement
with them around any possible changes that,
that might affect them in that way.
Uh, new question from the Honorable, um, Megan Woods.
Thank you. So what we are seeing in terms
of the manufacturing sector, going back to
that is the worst employment drop in months
that we've seen in the sector.
So within the reduced appropriation that the government, um,
has put towards manufacturing,
and I think probably shows where it's prioritizing it,
what is your plans as minister to turn that around
to protect those well-paid, um, highly skilled jobs
and create those opportunities for New Zealanders?
Yeah, I mean, creating high skilled jobs isn't a thing
that I can wave a magic wand in Wellington to achieve,
and I don't seek to, and I don't think anyone in the current
government would, um, thank me for trying, um,
more importantly out in the real world.
Um, they want to be able to get on
with their businesses in a productive way, uh,
that maximizes their ability to produce goods
and services such that they can pay their people
and themselves, um, uh, to the maximum extent possible.
So, um, you know, I'm, I'm trying to, um,
answer the question as as helpful as I can, but,
but to the extent that the premise of it is
that I should be doing,
or the government should be doing particular things that,
um, that have the direct impact, um, as directed
by government regulation or funding, I, I don't think
that's, um, the way that I would, would frame the,
the challenge and the opportunity that, that,
that people on in manufacturing see.
Thank you. Supplementary, supplementary, um,
no one's expecting you to have a magic wand.
I think probably people would've preferred you'd kept, um,
the funding that was allocated to support productivity
and skills development in the,
in the manufacturing sector in place, rather than cut it,
uh, by two thirds in this year's budget.
Um, what I want to know is with that vastly reduced budget
that you have allocated towards it,
what your priorities will be in terms
of protecting Kiwi jobs in the manufacturing sector.
My priority is for New Zealand businesses,
including manufacturers, to be productive
and profitable, as I've said a number of times.
Um, and government budgets are useful in so far only
as they produce good real world outcomes.
If we're talking about outcomes
that manufacturers want two years worth of recessionary, uh,
conditions in which they had negative growth only turned
around within the last few months,
notwithstanding the most recent blip.
And, and I've acknowledged already at the outset, um, that,
um, the recovery will be patchy,
that's absolutely inevitable.
Uh, but the trend is good.
The trend is in the right direction.
Uh, that's what I'm focused on.
And, uh, I don't think many people in the real world are so,
uh, concerned about the way
that the government thinks it's gonna help people so much.
It's actually, um, the, the, the, the tangible benefit
that actually can accrue when a government has a sensible
approach, uh, to targeting the support that it does provide,
but also is able to assist in a number of other ways,
including those that we've canvased today.
Thank you. And just another supplementary
and just really wanting to clarify,
'cause I'm genuinely not wanting to put words in your mouth.
Sure. Uh, but from what I'm, what I'm taking from
what you are saying, you don't see it as minister
that it is the government's role, um,
to be supporting our manufacturing businesses around, uh,
creating those well-paid jobs.
No, that's not what I said, So, all right. Okay.
Would you like to say what you do see
as the role of government?
Well, we've spent the last 45 minutes, um,
talking about things like investment boost, um,
improving digitization productivity, and, pardon me,
1% growth 20 years. So, so let the
Minister finish his answer.
Can you stop interpreting the
Minister? Yeah. Thank, thank
you. I mean, we've discussed a number
of different, uh, measures
and, um, not all of them, in fact, very few
of them relate directly to government, um,
inserting itself into, um, businesses in a way
that perhaps the member might wish.
And, and of course I would,
I shouldn't in turn put words in her mouth.
Um, but, um, in terms of the way
that we can support businesses to be more productive
and profitable, um, there are many different opportunities,
and we've talked about health and safety,
we've talked about employment, we've talked about, uh,
skilled migration, we've talked about vocational education,
we've talked about bespoke arrangements
through advancing manufacturing association.
Uh, we've talked about, um,
the manufacturing productivity advisory group.
We've talked about small business advisory group
and the general work of government, which is actually
to improve the macroeconomic conditions such
that people can actually get ahead in this country.
We've seen it much more recently than
in the previous six years.
Um, that's a good thing.
And people out in the real world are celebrating
that whatever the discussion
around budget line items might be today.
Mm-hmm.
Scott Willis, a new question. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so we are aware
that the government set a target to double the value
of exports within 10 years.
And, and yet we've also heard that we we're cutting funding
and cutting funding to the sector.
So I'm, I'm, I'm wanting to tease out that this direction
of austerity, um, how was that?
What parts of that are going to, are going to assist with
doubling our export value within 10 years?
How was that gonna happen?
And, and I also, within that,
I'm thinking about the reorganization of our science sector
and how, how we might, how we might, um,
see spin out of innovation.
But is that, is that something that you are working with,
with, you know, the movement from the riss to the pros that,
that we, you know, if we, we think about wool, for example,
you know, building up manufacturing,
but it seems like this is, I I I'm interested in
what the ministers sees are the key actions
that can be taken, given
that we've seen a reduction in funding
and resourcing. Yeah,
I, I, if I may say I, I think it's a, a good question
around, um, what the post Callahan world looks like.
Obviously the connection between research, um, science
and development generally,
and, um, um, the economic growth that the government is, um,
seeking, um, is, uh, you know, well established
and the delivery of that
through a different vehicle than Callahan, um, with,
you know, public research, um, organizations,
as you've noted, um, you know,
providing a primary vehicle for that.
Um, and Dr is the minister who's leading that work.
Um, I know, however, there's a whole ecosystem that exists,
including in, um, academic institutions.
Um, I've had a couple of really fruitful visits with, um,
uh, an entity known
as New Zealand Product Accelerator based in New Market
Auckland, um, which is a, um, you know, spun off the, um,
university of Auckland and they partner with, um,
private sector entities that, uh, maybe have, um, an idea
but don't know how to, um, you know,
and make that, um, real in terms of, um, increased, um,
delivery of products and therefore, um, export potential.
Obviously the trade, um, elements in terms of, um, you know,
new freight trade agreements
or expanded access will be a key part of that.
But the growing, the going
for growth program more generally, so it's about, um,
competitive business settings, um, within New Zealand
as well as that external element.
Um, it's about, um, you know, encouraging businesses
to be more productive in a number of different ways,
and the skills and investment piece, um,
is, is a key part of that.
Mm-hmm.
Primary, uh, Dr. Hamish Campbell. Yeah.
Excellent. Thank you, minister. And you mentioned one
of your previous answers just briefly.
Um, the regional business partners, um,
is the government still funding that?
Does this network have
Yeah, I mean, the government is still funding
it to answer your question.
Um, and we're continuing to fund it, um, in a way
that reflects the importance of those local,
um, delivery bodies.
So there are, um,
business advisors in different areas around New Zealand.
And, and to be clear, the whole map of New Zealand, um, is,
is accounted for in terms of where those, um, um, chambers
of commerce and economic development agencies have reached.
Um, and, and also at a Pan national level, there's, um, uh,
the business mentor program
and an excellent group of volunteers whom I should
acknowledge, particularly in volunteer week.
Um, and, and not only is that, um, a good network, um,
in a business as usual kind of sense,
but also in different parts of the country, um,
it's become clear in situations of disaster.
Um, so think Cyclone Gabrielle, um, COVID time as well, um,
Auckland anniversary flooding in, in my own neck
of the woods, that those are able
to provide a rapid response, um, uh, business advisory
function for those particularly grappling
with the imposition of new rules that, uh, you know,
by their nature because they're responding
to emergency often come without much warning
or consultation, but, you know, seeing to the government
of the day to be the right thing to do.
Um, so they provide some, uh, degree of resilience, um,
in those kinds of situations, as well as ongoing advice
and training about how businesses can, you know, do better,
particularly for new entrants,
but also for those who've been around a while and, and,
and are keen to explore
how they can improve their productivity.
And a finally quick question.
Um, minister, many of the small businesses
that you'll meet with will be for small food producers.
Mm-hmm. Um, the Commerce Commission has recently proposed a
ban on the rebates
and charges that the charge to those businesses, um,
they add up to about $5 billion a year.
The ComCom thinks, um, for, you know, the practices
of getting them into, essentially
what is a ny buying situation between the two, um,
supermarkets, are you focused on
how you might help those small businesses
that are competing, um, for space on shelves
to sell their food that is produced in New Zealand, um,
and how you might make interventions that make
that easier for small business owners?
Yeah, I mean, I'm, I'm keen to help in any way I can,
obviously, but at the same time, I can't treat on the toes
of, um, the Minister of Commerce
or the Minister of Economic growth.
So to the extent, for example, that your conversations about
what New Zealand's supermarket sector might look like
and the extent to which that's currently
competitive or could be made more.
So that's, that's an issue
for them rather than one I can speak to directly.
So, um, alright. Looks like
that's all minister the questions that we have.
Thank you so much. You might get some
written questions though after. Understood.
Thank you. Thank you so much. Thanks.
Your team settled down and then we will,
sorry,
Question will come back.
We have one and a half hours with you minister,
so if you would like to start by some opening remarks,
keeping them to around five minutes, that would be great.
Thank you. Sure.
Thank you very much, chair.
I thank you to the committee
and the opportunity to meet with you here today.
Pleased to be here as the Minister of Science,
innovation, and Technology.
I'm joined by officials, uh, from MB,
including the secretary, uh, Carolyn Tremaine and her team,
and, uh, the chief executor of Calhoun Innovation.
Stephen Korn, uh, is joining us as well, may join us.
Also, just to let you know now, as you'll be aware,
we're making bold changes to ensure the system delivers real
value for our economy, for our communities,
and for future generations.
New Zealand has world-class researchers,
but for too long our science system has been fragmented,
overly bureaucratic, and slow to respond
to the needs of a modern economy.
That's why we're focused on reform.
We're backing science and innovation
that drives economic growth, creates high value jobs,
and help solves real world problems.
Budget 2025 reflects this direction.
We're investing 20 million over two years to support suit,
support the establishment
of three new public research organizations.
These will focus on bio economy, earth sciences,
and health and forensic science.
They'll replace the current Crown Research Institute
to be better equipped to translate research into
commercial success.
We'll also be establishing a fourth public research
organization focused on cutting edge
technologies such as ai.
Thank you, uh, quantum technologies, synthetic biology,
and their applications, and ensuring New Zealand remains at
the forefront of global innovation.
I recently announced a $71 million, uh, funding package
to support the Robinson Institute
and their work underpinning cryogenic super conduction.
This is the first step in establishing the advanced
technology research organization.
These four pros will play a crucial role in our broader
science sector reform agenda, driving high impact research,
and fostering collaboration between
academia, industry, and government.
We're also progressing the disestablishment
of Callahan innovation as we move
to a more focused streamline system.
Budget 25 includes 38.1 million over two years
to support this transition, including redundancy costs
and the transfer of key functions to envy
and the soon to be established CROs.
Another major step forward is the introduction
of a new gene technology regime.
Many agree that for too long, New Zealand has had some
of the most restrictive gene technology rules in the world.
This has held back innovation in healthcare,
agriculture, and climate resilience.
The government's gene technology bill aims to change that.
And budget 2025 provides 23 million over the forecast period
to establish dedicated gene technology regulator.
This includes funding for compliance, monitoring,
and enforcement will also ensure gene technologies can be
used safely and effectively.
B 25 also reprioritized 40 million from the science
portfolio over four years to contribute setting up
of Invest New Zealand from one July, 2025.
This will be a dedicated standalone agency looking
to position New Zealand as a premier destination
for foreign direct investment.
This will create higher paying jobs and grow the economy.
It will do this by streamlining the investment process
and providing tailored support to foreign investors
and including capital investment
and fostering greater innovation in key sectors.
We're also investing in the long-term
success of the science system.
The newly established Prime Minister
of Science Innovation Technology Advisory Council will
provide strategic advice where we should focus our efforts
and how we can best return,
get the best return on our investment.
B 25 allocates 5.8 million over five years
to support the council's work.
The council brings together some
of the country's leading thinkers and practitioners,
and their job is to help the government
answer the big questions.
What are the next frontiers for New Zealand science?
Where should we invest to stay competitive?
How do we ensure our science systems fit for the future?
All of this is about making sure our science
and innovation system is focused
and aligned with the government's economic priorities.
The problems we're trying to solve
with science reforms include under utilization,
over utilization, too much competition,
too little competition,
poor integration across the main science sectors
or co uh, poor commercialization.
The system lacks focus,
it delivers small results across many areas rather
than doing a few areas.
Well, there's no strategy to say what's important
or direct scarce resources towards those priorities.
Our public research institutions focus on traditional areas
of strength with a limited ability to respond
to emerging opportunities.
Some changes will be disruptive, but they are necessary.
The current system is not financially sustainable
and is not delivering the impact New Zealanders need.
Finally, I do want
to acknowledge the significant ongoing contribution
of our research community.
These reforms are not at all a criticism
of our scientists far from it.
They're about giving our researchers the tools, the support,
and the system they need to succeed.
We want a science system that is ambitious, outward looking
and focused on results.
One that helps New Zealand compete globally,
grow our economy, and improves the lives of our people.
Our investments in our work program will drive
the changes we need.
Uh, thank you Madam Chair and back here.
Thank you. Uh, we'll start with you Davidon.
Thank you Madam Chair.
And, um, thank you minister for hearing
with us this afternoon and for such a large window of time.
There are many topics that we are keen. Sure.
Um, uh, really interested in your opening remarks
and in, in the messaging coming outta government.
That's saying that science is central to economic growth.
A statement I think everyone around this table would agree
with, but budget 2025 cuts science funding
by $45 million according
to the New Zealand Association of Scientists.
But isn't that contradictory?
Uh, so happy to talk to that. Uh, several things.
Uh, I would contend
that budget 25 net net does not actually, uh,
reduce funding to science.
If you look at the wider science investments,
including a hundred million in Elevate
the 40 million into Invest New Zealand, which has a, uh,
an objective to, uh, recommend
and encourage investment in science, innovation
and technology, uh, then I'd put to you that in fact,
we're not removing funding from the science portfolio.
Turns out it's a bit more than that.
It turns out that the baseline is actually not a stable
baseline, that a baseline that has changed
or that does change, uh, over successive years.
And that some of the changes
to the science funding were actually decisions made in
budget 23 and 24.
So I would contend that there's actually not a net, uh,
reduction in science funding through this budget.
Do you want to add any detail to that? Uh,
No, I think that captures it. Minister. Yeah. Uh,
Reprioritization, um, is substantially what's
Occurred. So,
so moving money around, essentially.
So would you agree with Professor Tahu cuckoo
that this budget is simply shuffling of the deck chairs?
So taking from Peter to give to Paul
with no meaningful new investment science?
Uh, no, there is reprioritization,
but, uh, as we look to
what is the major biggest science reforms in the last 30
years, uh, you want to put new money on a framework
that's robust and focused with clear outcomes.
So while we establish a really, uh, robust science system,
we are maintaining funding.
And, uh, our hope is then
that we'll have new funding in future budgets.
You wanna have a good system first,
But at a time when our competitors are increasing their
investment, we are holding the line or cutting
or reprioritizing.
So isn't there a huge risk that we fall behind?
But if we put new money onto a framework that doesn't work
and is unfocused, then we won't achieve the outcomes that
We're looking for. So can we only
do one thing at a time?
Uh, you would want to, I would still come back
to saying we want a robust science system
before we look to put, uh,
significant new money on top of it.
So yes, I'm sure we could, um,
fly it while we're still designing the plane.
I think I'd rather have the plane stable first before
We do that. So
Yeah. So again, members
indicate
to me if you have sub, um,
I'm going to Dr. Hamish Campbell.
Excellent, thanks. Thank you, minister.
And I think, um, you mentioned a hundred million going in
to Elevate, um, also that some
of the funding has been moved from science,
innovation technology to invest in New Zealand.
How does investing New Zealand support the wider science,
innovation and technology program
and economic growth, which I think the
previous move was trying to get to?
Sure. So the, uh, mandate for Invest New Zealand is
to bring, uh, new money, new entrepreneurs, uh,
new funding into New Zealand.
It's to be the, the front entrance
and the gateway, uh, to new funding.
And it has a specific objective,
I think in the budget documents, if I'm correct.
Uh, the specific objective is the entity will have a
particular interest in investing in science, innovation
and technology to drive economic growth so
that there's a statement in the documents
and the budget documents themselves.
So Invest New Zealand will be a significant contributor
to the science, innovation, and technology sector. Makes
Sense. Can I stop
separate, um, minister, what,
what effect does capital have on, uh, startups
and innovation that may have come
through from the basic science or fundamental science?
What, what, what's the problem?
What are we trying to fix yet?
Yeah, so there's a number of things that hold pathway, uh,
from an idea to a proof of concept to a early startup, uh,
to, uh, start up, uh, scope up, ramp up.
That's, that's a whole spectrum across the
technology transfer, uh, pathway.
And, uh, we have had some focus on that
through the Commercialization Partners network
through a number of funds, pre-seed accelerator fund,
for example, mentoring through the product, um,
accelerator, uh, group.
Uh, we have a number of pockets of projects that look
to achieve this, but what we're wanting to do is
to streamline that, have it really clear
what the function focus of each of them is, which have also,
of course, becomes part
of the intellectual property discussion, which are, are part
of these reforms as well.
So we do do pockets of, of stuff, uh, for people
who have good ideas and want to advance it further.
We want to focus that, uh, get it streamlined and,
and get it as effective as we can.
Uh, new primary from Scott Willis,
A signal to the chair that I do have
quite a number of questions. Um, so you
Start with first primary, Um, to
address Invest nz when Callahan innovation was
disestablished, the 84.6 million was shuffled
elsewhere to, um, for, for the establishment of Invest nz.
But what allocation has been made for the transfer transfer
of staff to the new public research organizations?
Is it just all of that money just gone ahead and
and is it that, just that, that 20 million, um,
in reprioritized funding to establish, is that, is
that all that's
There? I'll, I'll have the,
uh, details to you from, uh, one
of the team here, but, uh, the funding followers follows,
uh, the movement of people from Callahan into one
of the pros, the biotechnology, for example.
So their funding follows them.
And then on top of that, uh,
there is the organizational change funding,
which I think is 20 million fund Correct.
In the pros. Yeah. From pros.
And in, in that sense, what evidence
or advices the minister received that this level of funding,
the $20 million for such a rapid transformation from RIS
into pros by 1st of July, is sufficient
to manage the risks involved
and to ensure an effective transition
and not a loss of capability of skill sets.
Because what we've heard from the sector is
that people are leaving, that we've got young scientists
who have left or are leaving.
We've got scientists
who have been involved in the science sector for years
and years and years, decades looking for jobs elsewhere
because they don't see a future.
They see, they see a chaos.
Uh, well, as, as we said, uh,
there we clearly signaled there would be some, uh,
job consequences as we look to Disestablish Callahan
and, uh, the merger of the riss,
the E seven Riss into the, uh, three pros, uh, is on track.
Uh, it's on track for one July.
Uh, it will be a short form merger.
Um, the relative boards, uh,
have been working collaboratively, uh, very well actually,
uh, since the Prime Minister made the announcements
announcement in the State of the Nation speech, uh,
the funding that's been put aside, uh, in this budget, uh,
for that, uh, that creation of the pros
and that a movement of people from the CROs into the pros.
Uh, every indication we have is that, uh,
that will be sufficient to achieve, to achieve that task
with a view to those who are leaving, uh, the, the, uh,
the system if you like, and going elsewhere.
That's something we grapple with all the time,
which is partly why we wanted to do the system reform
so we can see a clear direction in a clear pathway
for our science community.
Supplementary A couple of sub. Thank you.
What is the plan for the fourth PRO
and how will that interact with the universities be funded
and retain capability until it's way forward?
Is is clear because that, that seems like a very much a,
an open book at the moment.
We don't know what the heck's happening.
Well, we kind of do. So it'll be an advanced technology
PRO that will focus on emerging technologies like, uh,
artificial intelligence, like synthetic biology.
Um, and furthermore,
I've already announced the first funding stream into that,
the $70 million to Robinson's Research Institute, uh,
with a focus on cryogenic superconducting quantum will also
be a part of the advanced PRO.
So what's proposed here is a hub and spoke model.
Uh, the first spoke is the cryogenic superconducting, uh,
from Robinson's Institute.
But then what's also true is
that we'll be seeking advice from the newly established
Prime Minister Science innovation
and Technology Advisory Council as to
what the other spokes like, uh, look like, uh,
what this relationship and,
and the, the work program
for the advanced technology PRO should be
From Ruben Davidson.
Thank you. Madam Chair. You, you spoken your comments.
You talked about providing the science sector
with the tools they need to succeed
to pick up on a point raised by, um, Scott Willis.
The feedback from the science sector is
that currently they're not seeing the tools
or the structure they need to succeed.
Mm. They, all they're seeing is reason
to leave as quickly as possible.
And there are other countries very happy to pick up some
of our brightest and best
because whilst there's the state
of flux domestically here in New Zealand,
there's PF opportunity paying better in other countries.
Sure. Look, as we move to, uh, direction
and a robust framework for the science sector, um,
that is a period of flux, as you say, period of change,
and people may make choices over that change.
Sure. Of course. I want to retain our brightest
and our best here,
but I understand their decision making as well.
Uh, we are still to one July is when the, uh, pros will,
will come up and I'd say to people, just give us, give us
that opportunity, um, to point science in a direction
that is meaningful and, and has good impact
and, uh, then make a decision.
But I understand the decision making so
Supplementary. Thank
you, um, Adam, chair.
So, so the feedback I'm getting is that the disruption
so far has the potential to do a decade's worth of damage.
That's a long recovery period for a very,
very delicate sector.
Yeah. It's not the feedback I'm getting.
So I understand you may be
hearing, hearing different voices.
Uh, what I'm hearing is some enthusiasm.
Uh, we did right from the right and the very beginning
actually around the CS coming together, uh, into pros.
So, um, you know, there'll, there'll be,
there'll be different views, um,
but I am sensitive to our human resource
and how important it is and the investment
we've all, all made in it.
And, and as best as we can, our desire to retain it,
I think too. Minister, if
I could add, uh, just to that, um,
we've done a lot of detail planning with Riss around, um,
making sure that we, uh, uh,
doing things in a, in a planned
and, um, well constructed manner that gives
as much certainty to the sector,
to the people employed in the sector as early as possible.
And, um, everybody would obviously in a, um, situation
where you are merging different organizations together, um,
like certainty sooner.
But, um, we are working our way through that.
And actually I'm, um, as the minister said earlier,
really encouraged by the work that's been done
and the, um, approach of the C ps to,
to work really constructively and collegially together.
So I'm, uh, hopeful that we will not, um, lose, um,
you know, key research
or other science based staff in New Zealand.
So during the best we can to plan that through
simply. Excellent.
Thank you. Minister, can you explain what the benefits are
of combining the RIS into these, into these organizations?
Sure. Uh, so as I mentioned, some
of the issues we are trying to, to resolve
through the science sector reforms, uh, are those
of too much competition, too little competition
under utilization, over utilization?
A good example would be,
and it's a good example in collaboration
with the university sector as well,
would be research infrastructure
and, uh, each of the ris,
each purchasing their own nuclear magnetic, uh,
resonance machine, for example, uh, when, uh,
a few moments down the road is another CRI
who has, has exactly that.
And this is an argument, uh, for the universities as well.
So as part of the science secret reform,
we have the opportunity, uh, to collaborate
and, uh, do a better job with procurement, uh, across
what can be very expensive research infrastructure.
So bringing together the riss gives us that opportunity.
What it also creates is a very powerful, for example,
the biotechnology, uh, PRO,
that would be a international world leading entity
of substance end to end, uh, in biotechnology.
Uh, what's been put to me,
there may only be one other similar organization, uh,
in the Netherlands of that sort of quantity,
mass track record ability, you name it.
Um, that could take proposals, could take research, work
and end to end and one entity, uh, deliver it.
And that's, that's very exciting,
the prospect of that. Mm-hmm.
Excellent. Can I, um, I appreciate the other side.
May want to go to various different areas.
So if I can just get on
to these scientific forms that, that'd be great.
Um, you've talked about two of the pros.
Can you outline what all the pros are and what they do
and what stage each of them are at?
Sure. Uh, so the expectation is, uh, that they'll be ready
to, uh, merge on one July, uh, the seven
Ros due into the three pros.
Uh, the one that is less changed is
ESR, Um,
that will pick up some forensic responsibilities,
but be substantively, uh, the same, the, uh, biotechnology,
um, PRO, uh, that will pick up, uh, land care.
Um, it will pick up plant and food.
Um, it will, uh, pick up, uh, well put the other way, the,
uh, earth science, uh, PRO will have GNS.
Um, and it will also have, uh, niwa, uh,
niwa having amalgamated with, uh, uh, MET service
and, um, Scion, of course, in the biotechnology PRO.
So these seven riss merging into those three are pros.
And then the new one is the advanced, uh,
technology, um, PRO.
So, you know, we are looking for, um, some benefits.
I've already mentioned a research
infrastructure collaboration.
Um, there should be benefits also, uh,
and administration, uh, of the, uh, of the entity.
And, uh, then through various tools, uh, we can point,
for example, statements of core purpose.
Uh, we can point the pros towards, uh,
what are are government objectives,
Uh, supplementary from, uh, Ruben
Davidson. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
On, on the, um, jumping ahead
to the final structure of pros.
Mm-hmm. Post a seamless transition on one July.
There's concern that's been raised in questions that
continue to go unanswered around the geographic location
of head offices of pros.
There's four members sitting around this table
to the South Island mps.
There's a very strong suggestion in Auckland that, um, that,
that the south island may no longer have the head office
of A PRO after the transition,
or sometime shortly thereafter, the minister
for the South Island, uh, has chosen not
to enter the discussion,
but I'm really interested to hear your perspective
as the Minister of science.
Sure. Uh, so these will be decisions, uh,
for the PRO boards.
Um, but I, I would have to say, uh, I am, uh, inclining,
uh, towards the impressive, uh, collection
of resources and skills, um,
that I'm seeing in the South island,
more specifically around Lincoln.
Um, I'm encouraged by what I see there,
but this will be a decision for the PRO, uh, boards.
Um, but I will be contributing to that decision making. Just
Some further questions on, oh, sorry. You can,
I was just gonna add that, that, uh, the bulk of the Riss,
um, have a distributed executive management model.
They don't have one single location
that is necessarily their head office.
They executive teams, uh, are located around the country.
Um, and as the minister says, uh, Lincoln is the,
the backbone of the bio economy.
Uh, p what will be the PRO, um, and will remain so, but
By virtue of that executive structure,
it could no longer be seen by title
or in any other way as head office for one
of the newly formed pros.
Uh, uh, that is possible.
Uh, although, um, in the modern age, um, it was pointed out
to me by someone in the CS
that actually it's only government departments
that have have head offices anymore.
It's an outdated concept
because of, uh,
this remote working capability
of the exec teams. Mm-hmm. Sure.
Alright, so just a final question on that from me anyway.
Others may have more, has,
have you minister had any engagement with UA about that?
'cause I know that there's been conversations raised in
those forums, and my
understanding is those questions are going under.
I've, I've had representative advocacy from, uh,
Canterbury University, uh, clearly from, um, partners at,
uh, Lincoln CRI partners,
and from, uh, Lincoln University as well.
Um, simply And,
and the minister for the south island, as,
as you mentioned. Yeah.
Uh, Scott with us. Thank you.
And when, when will the public aspect of the
pros become clearer given boards and executives?
Structures are still being operated in a CRI like company's
for profit model.
And can the minister confirm
that the new pros will not be run
as profit driven crown companies?
Uh, what I can say, certainly to the second point is, uh,
pros will be expected to be fiscally responsible.
Uh, so they will be expected to, uh, at,
at a minimum break even.
And we have to remember the, uh, structure of the reforms is
to, uh, amongst other things to generate economic growth.
It's part of our growth agenda.
And so, uh, there will be that expectation.
Now, uh, CS
as they currently exist shouldn't be frightened by that.
Uh, plant and food
and a number of others, um, do very well, uh, from a,
a revenue generating perspective.
Um, but, uh, part of their agenda will be, um,
to deliver economic growth.
And so why, why are the new boards missing Maori
and wahine compared to the composition of previous boards?
Uh, well, uh, the boards
and there is space to add others to boards.
Uh, we've made, uh, some announcements, uh, already,
certainly around chairs and, and some of the members.
Um, but, uh, there is opportunity for, uh, further changes
to that board structure.
Um, so at this point in time,
we've got not quite a transition board
because their, uh, periods are two
to three years, uh, variably.
Um, so this will be establishment
boards to move things along.
Um, so there is that opportunity at a later date to look at
where else we would need skills
around those, those board tables.
And just, um, just, uh, finally in, in this area, the,
we've seen cuts to geo net
and GNS more broadly as part of that transition.
And that will mean that analysts currently
who are working in teams of four
to monitor shifts will now be cut to teams of three with
GNS acknowledging
that this means a decrease in resilience as a result.
What evidence did he use to make the decision to cut funding
to GNS and decrease in resilience?
Because that essentially means New Zealanders will now be
less safe from the risk of tsunami or earthquake risk.
Uh, so I would need to see the details to, to verify that.
But I'd make the point that it was a decision
by the CRI boards.
Uh, it was not a decision by me.
That was an operational decision
And a decision related to the cost of the transition
and the requirement to, to manage
that cost in-house or somewhere.
Minister. Um, uh, the Gnet function, um,
had been funded on an annual basis for a number of years.
Uh, we worked, MND worked closely
with other colleague agencies
to put forward a budget proposal
to give it permanent funding.
Uh, and it was funded at a certain level.
Um, and so there have been no cuts.
It's always been known that that funding profile looked
as it would look.
So there's been no cuts in this budget in relation to Gnet,
the funding profile always looked, uh, uh,
it was always known what the funding profile was.
Yeah. So they've always known we've had
to cut our cloth to that profile.
Alright. Uh, supplementary from David, just coming back
to the comments you made about the, um, boards of the, uh,
they're doing biosecurity pros
and the, the potential to add,
um, or to, to, to take on further appointments mm-hmm.
Once the establishment has happened. Mm-hmm.
Um, which we could be oversimplifying it to say
that the men get in and do the work,
and then we add some diversity further down the track once
the direction of travel's been determined.
But, but are you, are you aware of the fact
that there are more, um, men called Paul
with science institute board than there are women?
Uh, I, I was not, because as I said
to my initial statements as the needs
and skills required, uh, that was
how we'll we'll fill in the boards.
So regardless of what their names were, it was
what their skills were, not what their names were.
But this isn't about their, just their names.
This is about the fact that they're men.
It's about their skills, actually.
So it doesn't concern you at all that there are there,
there are more men called Paul than women on those
Boards? Uh, no, it does
not. Uh,
particularly when I look at the recent, um,
prime Minister's, uh, science awards of, which is,
I recall 75% were women.
Well done then. Excellent.
So, no, I'm not considering this instance. So
They can win prizes, but they can't win a
Position? No, they can, they can certainly
been positions on board,
but as we looked at the skills profile we were particularly
needing for establishment boards,
these were the decisions that we made.
Uh, new questions.
Um, Steve, is there a web slip from you?
I haven't seen, uh, you,
there should be an electronic web slip.
Yeah, there is a web slip. Can I check with the clerk?
Because Scott has been taking part in this committee,
so I just Yeah,
but I'm just checking if there is a web slip.
Should can continue. It should be.
Um, if there's not, then, all right. It's in the meantime.
Is there a new primary from members? Um, yeah.
Uh, uh, Dr. Hamish campus.
Excellent. Um, why have you decided to close the Callahan,
um, innovation?
So, uh, Callahan, uh, innovation had been a, uh,
a challenged, uh, enterprise over multiple governments.
Um, and for clearly then for a number of years.
And, um, we needed to make that decision as to, uh,
whether Callahan, um, as it was conceived
and as it was delivering, was a good fit
with the science reforms.
And, uh, the decision that we made was not, was not,
and as the Prime Minister said in his state
of the nation speech, um, we, we will be looking
to Disestablish Callahan.
So it was just that, uh, it wasn't achieving its objectives,
certainly as it was initially conceived.
Uh, there were fiscal issues, uh, around,
uh, Callahan as well.
And so the decision has been made
to Disestablish, and we've proceeded with that,
Uh, Supplement.
Um, what happens to, to its functions.
Uh, several things will happen with those functions.
A large majority of them will pass into the, uh, pros.
Uh, some of them are still to be worked through, uh,
for example, the, uh,
measurement standards laboratory a slightly
different, uh, position.
So it is sort codified
and, um, others we have needed to, uh,
reposition on on a pathway of, uh, of disestablishment.
So that's roughly how Callahan will, will Disestablish.
There'll be some functions that also transfer into mv.
And then mainly, uh, related around, um,
technical assessments
and business engagement for the RDI, um,
the research development tax incentive, um, some
of the administration of the grants
that Callahan previously did, such as Trailblazer,
um, and student grants.
And then the founder
and startup support program will be transferring to MB
and well, the technology and compete program
and the health tech activator.
So, uh, what we've tried to do and
Looking through them as, as the line, uh, functions
and activities to the areas that have, um,
either an expertise
or in the case of MB have, um, experience
with administration of grants and funds.
Alright. The preliminary Davidson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, with the Disestablishment
of Callahan, and we talked earlier about
other major changes happening
where no new investing take place
until something's been shut down with, with Callahan.
Is that, that's the plan.
You, so what's the timeline for, for shutting Callahan down?
How long and how much ultimately is that?
How long is it gonna take? How much is it gonna cost
The timeframe to disestablish
The Yeah, so, uh, Callahan, the institution
and the entity, um, will disestablish, uh, via legislation,
uh, by one July, 2026.
And that's gonna cost, Uh,
we've set aside $38 million over four years
to disestablish call.
And is there a contingency?
If that costs more than that, where will that come from?
Uh, There is a contingency as well. Yeah.
And if it goes over the contingency,
If it goes over the contingency, then that will be, need
to be met from the science appropriations.
Right. Yeah. Remembering
that Callahan was effectively being
subsidized for many years,
Which could be the case with lots of, lots of science
organizations structures. Right?
Yeah. Unusual for that one. For one.
So close to market. Alright.
Uh, ary from, uh, Scott will,
Thank you. Actually,
a, a new question thinking about global Yep.
Context. Sorry
To stop. You have a
sub? Uh, yep, Dr.
Yep. Excellent. Um, you retained some of the, um,
the bio economy functions in the
Callahan. Why have you done so?
So, uh, I retained
and extended, uh, the timeframe to this establishment
for two parts, uh, of Callahan,
the Applied Technologies group.
Uh, I felt they needed a bit more time,
and it turned out some of their contracts were coming due
with just a bit longer time as well.
Um, so I agreed that, that, that made sense.
The, uh, biotechnology group, it also became apparent to me
that, uh, they were actually providing a, a number
of functions that it was important to retain.
And so I funded them on a two year extension, uh,
which gives time for, uh, those providers
who are using their service to think through, uh,
other models, uh,
and time for the biotechnology group to stand on its feet
and, and, and pay its way.
So I've given them a two year extension.
Thank You.
Uh, so supplementary corpus.
Thank you. Um, so in the, the,
So, so can I just clarify here now there is something
going on between the two retailers.
So the, it looks like we have a web slip now
for Steve, uh, Abel.
So only Steve can take part in this now.
Uh, I supplement. Did you supplement jump in?
You had a supplementary Ruben?
I did have a supple, Yep. Supplementary.
Um, you, you just talked about, um, making a call
to delay by two years.
Yeah. And, and,
and I guess looking at the volume
of change across the sector at the moment
and your role as the minister mm-hmm.
Um, I'm hoping that the structural change
that's underway now wasn't something that was, um,
decided at pace.
I'm presuming that it was something
that was developed in opposition
and was then the process was
instated by the former minister.
And now you've come in as a new minister partway
through that change process.
What I'm getting at is how much influence have you had over
the ability to step into, into the, into, into the ministry
and essentially take control of a, a,
a significant change process at a very late stage? Mm-hmm.
So the, uh, decisions were made
and announced in the, uh,
prime minister's state of the nation speech.
Um, so those announcements, uh, were made.
Um, I had, uh, visibility on it
through various cabinet processes,
so I understood what was happening.
Uh, my warranting occurred after that announcement.
Uh, subsequent to being informed
and, uh, tooling up around the portfolio, I was able
to make decisions, uh, like I'd indicated to you, um,
to actually extend, uh, parts of the contracts
for the applied technology group at, uh, Callahan
and for the Biotechnology group as well.
Uh, they were not part of the initial decisions, so
that was new information, um, that I was able to retrieve,
uh, from MB and Charter a slightly different course.
So that's, that's an example of yes, sustainably, uh, the
reforms had made its way through cabinet.
Uh, when this was passed to me, uh, I was able
to pick it up, progress those reforms,
but also, um, to look at it with, with new eyes.
And, uh, if there was a slightly different path
that maybe made more sense with more information
to, to chart their course.
And those, those two groups is an example of that. Sure.
And just generally, as minister, you feel
that you have license to assert your
signature, your intellect,
your experience into these portfolio areas to navigate
and guide the significant change process?
I, I have license in a mandate
to lead the portfolio in collaboration
with cabinet colleagues.
Yes.
Alright. And going forward members, can I say that, uh,
the, these hearings are not about general policy discussion?
So the question needs to be about the estimates,
and if the questions are not about,
estimates are not brought back to estimates,
I will be interrupting.
Uh, we have, uh, is that a sub? Uh,
No, it's a primary New, new, uh,
primary from Steve Abel.
Uh, thank you Madam Chair.
Mine is to do with the estimates
regarding the new investment in gene technology.
Mm-hmm. Um, in the explanation of the budget, it says
that the updated rules intend to support, um, technologies
to make advancements in healthcare.
No argument there. Climate change protection
of our unique environment, you know, lift
to our agricultural productivity.
I just wanna test minister, um, whether
forfeiting our GMO free status will appoint
Order chair Appoint of order.
I don't think this question is, is
Addressing The vote,
it's a general policy statement as you've just ruled.
Yes. So, um, just can you finish the question and
because if you're going in the direction
of whether we should be GMO
or no GMO, no, then that is a general policy discussion.
Can you just bring back to the
Budget? The, the vote
explicitly says that the reason
for the expenditure is
to lift our agricultural
productivity. I'm sure that's within scope.
Yeah. So you can, um, question about how, I mean,
in lifting of agriculture productivity, but, um,
but if it's not about whether we should be GMO or non GMO,
but can you, can you, can you, um,
ask your question and then I'll assess.
The, the means of lifting our agricultural productivity
using the gene tech bill is through the release
of genetically modified organisms into agricultural systems.
Um, and I just wanna test whether the minister accepts, um,
the advice of ag research that biological coexistence
of genetically modified ryegrass
with conventional ryegrass is impossible.
So the effect of releasing
that substance in particular would be
to forfeit our current non GMO status.
And it was the finding on the New Zealand Institute
of Economic Research point, point, order, forfeit
Cost point of order To 20 billion
Point of order point of order. Oh,
This, This, this is not to do with the vote.
So, so, um, I'm speaking to the point of order.
Let me Yeah, no, let him finish the question.
You finish the question, Steven.
Yeah, can, but I, speaking to The
point of order, can you come to the question?
Actually, you're just describing what others have said.
So I'll, I'm just waiting for you to finish the question.
Sure. Can, can, so again, can you ask the member
to not interrupt me till I've completed
No point of any member can take a point of order. Hang
On a minute. I just said I could
speak to the point of order
and you've said no, finish the
Question. Okay. You speak to the point
of order speaking,
but you haven't even finished your question,
so I have, I can't make a judgment. Sure.
So, okay. But speaking to the point of order,
'cause I'm sure the minister, the members
are gonna keep interrupting me.
I'm trying to establish whether the purported benefit
of this investment in Genetech is going to be borne out
and what the logic of the government's position is on that,
given the risk to our primary production productivity
that the release of GM organisms is, that's
A question Yes. And let
the minister respond to Thank
You. What I'd say, Madam
Chair, is that
that discussion is still confidential, uh,
to the select committee that is reviewing the genetech
uh, regulations.
And that, uh, my purview is funding the Genetech
regulator in this vote.
Just to clarify on that point, um,
I'm talking about public evidence that was given
by AG research and advice given by officials
to the previous national government in 2009
to GM Ryegrass would become permanent components
of New Zealand's pasture and dairy production systems.
I, I would stand by my statements though.
Those are discussions inside the committee, uh,
the confidential select committee,
considering the gene technology bill.
So presuming once the committee's finished,
will you take account of the economic risk
of forfeiting our,
That's not imp perview for this committee.
That's not in purview for this point,
Point of, there's a point of order members,
This is clearly not about, um, the allocation,
which is $22.9 million for a gene tech regulator.
We're referring back to 2009.
You've already ruled that this is a forward looking hearing,
not a, not a looking back of what's been, you've also ruled
that it's about the vote
and not about general policy statements.
I can't see how that question is
anything about both of those
Things. Can I speak to the
point of water? Please,
Uh, speak to the point of water.
Uh, I wonder, um, uh, how there can be scope
for questioning the logic of an expenditure
if it's predicated on an assumption that
that expenditure is gonna lift agricultural productivity.
But I can't actually ask questions about the logic
behind that assumption.
You can ask a question without making statements in there.
If you do that, then your question will be in order.
Do you want to ask that question?
Because you're making a lot of statements in there,
but you're not coming to the question, can you actually,
the way you are speaking to the point of order Mm.
The way you're, uh, posing a question in point, uh,
um, response to point of order.
Mm. If that is the way you want to present it
to the minister, that's totally fine with me.
Sure.
Um, and the other question, I guess is around the issue
of climate change Minister, um,
where there is clear evidence
that we have scientific knowledge of
how we can reduce our emissions in the agricultural sector
and other parts of our economy
and society without the use of genetech.
And yet those means
and methods aren't being invested in by the government.
Um, and I note the reduction in the Sustainable Future Fund,
um, and those investments in scientific methods.
So the question involve Genetech.
So the question is about the investment in this regulator,
how that's going to lift productivity,
and how that's going
to make any difference in climate change.
Yeah. I'm questioning the, the logic of the
Assumption, but that's the investment.
You, you're questioning the,
In simple terms, I'm saying, is this the most efficient
and effective use of public money
to deal with climate change?
Uh, what I, what I can say is that, uh,
the environment is, uh, contributed to
through the Catalyst Fund, through the Endeavor Fund,
a smaller part through the Health Research Fund, uh,
and through the Marsden Fund, quite aside from
what the Strategic Science Investment Fund, uh,
contributes towards overall environmental gains,
Um, supplementary Dr. Hamish.
Excellent. Um, on the Genetech
regulator, um, hopefully you might be able
to help out the other member.
How will this money be spent, um,
in developing a regulator?
Um, so I'll have my colleagues talk the details about, uh,
the contribution to budget 25 to the gene regulator.
Uh, we'll have responsibility
for staffing the gene regulator.
There'll be a contribution to MPI, uh,
and a contribution to MB
administrative contribution
as well. Uh, Ian, do you have any,
Anything further? Uh, just to give a
sense of scale minister, as I understand
that the regulator will have around about 15 staff
in Australia with about 50,
Right. Um, supplementary
Rub Davidson.
Yeah. Just further questions on, on the,
on the Genetech regulator, which is included in this quote
to the tune of 2020 $2.9 million, um,
setting up a regulator to regulate when
federated farmers admitting, say that
GE reforms must ensure farmers have the right to choose not
to adopt these technologies with the inability
to contain geos in the environment.
How is a regulator with $22.9 million
or any sum of money going to be able to regulate that?
Uh, so what I can talk to is the, uh, capability
of the fund that's been put aside in budget 25 to meet the
functions, uh, of, uh, the gene regulator.
And, um, I'm assured, uh, by officials
and by staff that the funding in B 25, uh, is adequate
to fund the gene regulator office.
So, so, so
where there are businesses in New Zealand who currently
trade on the fact that their products are created
or made in a country that is GE free,
once this regulator is in place,
they're no longer going to be able to trade on that.
That's a competitive advantage that they're going
To, again, I I won't Go ahead, Madam Chair.
Yeah. So, um, I say that instead of, uh, stating
what you think, if you want to phrase that
as a question to the minister.
Sure. So, am I correct
and are the owners of Trans Alpine Honey in Rolleston
who have said that being GE free is a competitive advantage
for their business, are you able to provide any guarantees
that you will have in place a regulator
that will enable them to trade as a GE free brand? Uh,
I'll have a, a regulator in place, uh, that will be able
to fulfill the functions, uh, that, uh,
cabinet has directed.
And that legislation directs,
Would they be able to give any business?
Would they be able to give any business
ge free status in New Zealand?
Uh, that will be dependent on the regulations which are
currently, uh, making not the regulations, the legislation,
which is currently making its way, uh,
through protected select committee hearings.
So, am I right? Hold on, hold on there.
There's, uh, we, we members Davidson supplementary,
Am I correct in thinking that you've got two
things going on at once here?
So, we've talked previously about the need
to complete one process
before you start another in the space of Genet,
potentially one of the most significant scientific decisions
you could make for New Zealand.
And a decision you can only make once you are prepared
to have primary legislation moving at pace
and secondary legislation by way
of a regulator being developed in tandem
As it relates to this photo,
as it's been commented at 22.9 a million compared
to 1 billion in the overall science system.
That's quite a difference. Sure.
But just in principle, in the case of Genetech,
you are happy for dual process
to be happening at the same time, primary legislation,
secondary legislation.
But in the case of many other areas of your portfolio,
you don't think that's the best approach.
And you, you are prepared
to slow processes down in other areas,
you're maintaining pace,
Point board point Of order. This
Is general policy discussion.
So, so I think, I think, um, I can see
where the question is coming from.
I think the funding is about regulator
and it's about the job of the regulator.
So we can just confine it to that.
The member can put a question in the minister,
I'm sure Will, is very capable
of explaining what the regulator will do.
That is the job of the regulator to regulator
what is high risk and what is low risk.
That is what it'll be doing. So, yep.
You want to finish that so that minister can
Respond to you, Christian.
So if we look at, for example,
the organics industry in New Zealand estimated
to be worth over a billion dollars annually as minister,
are you comfortable that $22.9 million is an adequate
investment in this vote
to protect a billion dollar plus growing industry?
Uh, so I'm comfortable that $22.9 million, uh,
for the office of the regulator will fulfill the functions
in the legislation as determined
by cabinet policy. But that's
A no, basically. So, all right. Will
Fulfill the functions that
cabinet and this government has decided.
But not Ken.
Ken, uh, if, are you still on the committee? Yeah.
So if you have any questions, can you put through me? Yeah.
Any questions that you have?
I have a supplementary from Dr. Him.
I think, I think what the opposition of trying to ask
what are the functions of?
And so, uh, to a large degree, again, that is still
inside committee, uh, still being decided, uh, what the,
the, the functions will be.
And so I won't enter into, into that, uh, domain.
But, uh, what I am saying is
that the 22.9 million put aside in this budget, uh,
will establish the gene regulator office.
Uh, alright. So, um, get supplemented
What, what effect has, um,
the current regulator had on our scientific output
over the last 20 years?
So, as I said in my, uh, open opening remarks, uh, the,
the problems we're trying to fix, uh, are those
of over utilization, under utilization,
too much competition, too little competition.
We haven't done well. Integrating across all the science
sector, uh, actors, uh, right from Crown Research Institutes
to universities, to NGOs, if you wanna call the Do Walls,
and the Robinsons and the Tron
and the sort of NGO type, uh, organizations.
There hasn't been good collaboration, uh, across,
that hasn't been a clear direction or strategy either.
And we know that if we look at other, uh,
small advanced economies that we might like
to model ourselves on, uh, the islands, the Singapores,
the fins of this world, uh, they have a very clear strategy
and focus, and they do several things well.
We've tended to do a lot of things, maybe not quite so well,
some of course are clear standouts,
but, you know, very generally, uh, that's part
of the purpose of the reforms, to, to focus
with guidance from the Prime Minister's committee, uh,
to focus the reforms, uh, determine what are priorities
and how we can deliver those priorities
into meaningful economic growth. Mm-hmm.
Alright. So members, again,
so policy discussions about coexistence is different.
So we just focus on this ward
and the investment that is going through this ward.
Uh, Scott Willis, is that a primary or a primary? Primary?
Primary. New primary. Thanks.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, nice to have my question.
Time back. Um, minister Science, innovation
and technology doesn't exist in a,
in a little bubble all around.
We've seen some big global changes. Mm-hmm.
And, um, we've seen President Trump in the US slashing the
National Institute for Health Funding in the US
that's starting to land big time here in Altara.
There are a number of big health research platforms there
that have suddenly lost their, um, NIH funding.
The biggest of them is the Dunedin study.
This is RA's longest, most famous research study,
and it's potentially going to be shut down.
What actions does the minister see as important to take
to ensure that this doesn't get shut down?
Hmm.
So there's several things here.
First of all, we need to respect the, uh, ability
for sovereign nations to make policy decisions.
I I won't be commenting on decisions, uh, made offshore, uh,
other than to say, uh, generally at, at this point, um, our,
uh, relationship, our research relationship
with international collaborators are still warm
and strong, particularly through the Catalyst Fund.
In fact, we've made recent announcements want you,
that's the purpose of the Catalyst Fund.
Um, so, uh, certainly we're aware of what's happening, uh,
in international environment.
Um, I think what we need to focus on is what we do well
and what we can bring, um, to those collaborations.
That's what we want, want to be focused on so
that we are ready to, to partner, uh, with international,
uh, entities that have skill sets that we may need that,
that share joint endeavors.
Uh, we wanna make sure that we focus, that we are ready
as a system to be able to best collaborate.
Can I add minister? Of course.
Um, the, the Dunedin Longitudinal study is
still funded by mb.
Um, so we fund it through the Strategic
Science Investment Fund.
So it used to be part of the HRC.
We took the funding and the project into mb
and so they've got long term funding for the data collection
and the curation and the continued, um, uh, collection
of data from the participants in the survey, both
that one and the study.
And the HRD still still funds research
that builds and draws on that data.
So the survey itself is, is well funded and looked after.
So it may be that it's other international projects
that draw that data that may have lost funding,
but the data itself is, is secure.
Um, and thank you. And a couple of subs on that.
How much funding have New Zealand researchers lost during,
as a consequence of the US trump's slashing of the NIH?
And is there any buffer that the government can, can give to
allow to stop some of our big important research projects
and outputs from shutting down?
Do you have a sense Of, I don't have a sense of, I,
I don't have a strong sense, but I'm aware of a couple
of studies where the funding has been, um, pulled
that relates to research that we are currently funding.
So, for example, we've got an infectious disease research
platform and some of the funding that was pulled is in,
in the infectious disease area.
So we are, uh, currently talking to the hosts of
that platform about whether or not they could reprioritize
some of the existing funding towards
continuing that relationship.
So that's an act of ation.
Okay. And, and is the minister aware
of any potential impacts of the US changing the assessment
criteria for Fulbright Scholars?
Because we've seen, um, projects, the US has said,
the projects that include any mention of race, gender,
or climate change, have some now been canceled
and the entire board
of the Fulbright has resigned just days ago.
So what contingency chair does the minister place to enable
that international research? Hold,
Hold on, on
What responsibility does the minister have over the
decisions of international funding bodies?
So, um, I, the minister can only respond
to any impacts on our research that is
and how that would continue.
Sure. Thank you. And in that same breath, I,
I respect international jurisdictions
to make their own sovereign choices.
Yeah. Um, I'm, I'm not aware particularly
of the Fulbright program and impacts here
Under not a hundred percent sure.
We, we do fund a small, small amount.
And my question was, what contingency does the minister
have in place to enable international research Before I was
interrupted, so that, that, that question I'd like to,
to have a response to please.
The Catalyst fund, which is a $30 million fund,
is our main outreach into,
from a funding perspective into international environments.
And I've made announcements recently.
Generally it's a dollar
for dollar matched quid pro quo, uh, type fund.
And, um, uh, I've made recent announcements, uh,
over these past few months of ongoing collaborations
with our, with our international partners.
And we, we look forward to doing more of that.
That's a good thing. Horizon
Europe as Well now. Oh,
horizon Europe, yes, of course.
Um, horizon Europe's a really important, uh, backbone
and access for us into our researcher in Europe.
And, uh, just, just recently we've been privileged to, um,
move into a protected group for want of a better word,
who has even, even better access, uh, to the Verizon,
Europe, uh, r and d system.
I want to say there's been more than a hundred million
dollars of benefit to us through that.
Uh, I just can't quite recall those things. Can't
Remember the number, But we, we have a 22%
success rate, which is very high.
So we are doing very, very well within Horizon Europe.
Thank you. Alright. A new primary from Rub Davidson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And,
and just as, as we move away from the questions relating
to the Dunedin study, um, I think it's probably appropriate
to acknowledge that the founder of the need Dunedin study.
That's true. And that was a significant contribution to
research here in New Zealand, but globally as well.
Um, I guess research like the Dunedin stuff
helps us to understand ourselves better.
Uh, and, and that's critical research, um,
for any nation to do.
Do you accept minister that removing master
and funding for social science
leaves major gaps in understanding issues in New Zealand,
like inequality, population change,
and how we can understand and communicate science?
Uh, so again, uh, sorry man to interrupt. Yeah.
Again, members remember this is not looking into the past
performance, but yeah.
If you bring it to the estimates, this
what has the master master funding?
Yeah, yeah.
Uh, okay. So, um, uh, look up, my view is that, uh,
humanities and social sciences, uh, are still funded
through, uh, a very large, uh,
performance based research fund, uh, through universities.
Uh, and indeed a, uh, number of, uh, the other funds, uh,
health research fund, for example, uh, continues
to substantively fund, uh, humanities and social sciences.
Um, so, uh, uh, I I believe that, uh, those particular areas
of research, uh, within the funding envelope
that we have are still well catered for
Sure. And I acknowledge
in a separate portfolio
that we are also stepping away from a formal census.
So there's, and, and I do acknowledge it's in a completely
different, different vote,
but we are potentially taking incremental steps in different
areas away from our ability to know ourselves and
therefore make best informed governance decisions
for the future of the country.
I spoke earlier about opinions
that I heard from science sector and science community,
and they differed to yours in relation
to the MARTON funding, the New Zealand Association
of Scientists Co-President, professor Troy Base said
that the, and I'm quoting the, the, um, professor here,
that the minister was asleep at the wheel running this
process with respect to the master fund cuts.
Is that embarrassing for you
as the minister and as a doctor?
Uh, no, not at all.
Uh, I'm very pleased I have the ability to, uh,
see the contribution to, uh, humanities
and social sciences, both
through things like the health research fund, um,
but also into the university sector, as I mentioned,
through performance based, uh, research funding.
And while of course we'd always like to do more, um,
I believe that we're still making a significant contribution
into that research domain.
So we possibly disagree on that.
But we probably agree
that social science research helps us understand
how people receive and respond to scientific information.
Uh, you know, it is its own domain.
It's, it's quite different to core research.
It's different to other parts.
So yes, it has a part to play in the
research research sector. Yeah.
But do you accept that you're actively defunding the kind
of work at the, at also at the exact point in time
when we are seeing a move away in public trust of,
Uh, so, uh, no.
Um, what I accept is that, uh,
government makes policy choices
and, uh, the policy choice was that we wanted
to pivot towards an economic growth agenda.
And so some of the decisions
around the master funding particularly, uh,
which was suggesting as have, uh,
already been placed into public domain, was to
how we could better focus our research dollars, uh,
towards an economic growth agenda, uh, that didn't, uh,
completely remove funding as I've mentioned PBRF
for humanities and social sciences.
But it was a policy decision
that was made for the Marden Fund. Mm-hmm.
From Dr. Excellent. Thank you.
Um, thank, thank, thank you minister.
And I think the previous, um,
member was talking about science communication.
Um, in, in your experience, do most research organizations
to have, part of their work is in science communication
and also there's a spinoff of companies out
of these organizations leading
to in effect science communication
because we're getting these ideas out
of the lab into real life.
And that's where additional a hundred million dollars from
Save the Elevate Fund would help. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. And but the, the point
you raised is, is a good point.
Um, how we, uh, demonstrate
and share with New Zealanders what our brightest
and our best, uh, are doing in the research
and development sector is an area we need to do it, do it,
do a lot better with and our international collaborators,
like collaborators, like through Invest New Zealand.
Um, so we, we do need to improve the communication we have.
So the new New Zealanders feel that they own the research,
they see the benefits of, of their taxpayer dollar.
And, uh, so that is a communication challenge
that we continue to have and
We're gonna administer. We also
fund through the Vote Science Media Center
and the Science Learning Center as well, which is around,
um, engagement with society
and communication of the value of science.
Yep. Uh, I'll put myself for a supplementary here.
I, the master fund, uh, minister when, uh,
science funding is, um, um, um, done
then the, how public sees the science funding is
that the science funding goes towards core science
that is supporting, uh, economic development environment
and also our health and benefits a whole of New Zealand.
Uh, but how do you see, um, that, uh, if on the name
of science funding, some of the money goes towards, uh,
spirituality or some kind of myth kind of, um, a kind of,
uh, things followed to, uh, conduct some of the projects
where there is no evidence that those things work.
So, uh, we want to be as evidence-based,
I'm sure most scientists do
as evidence-based as we possibly can.
Um, but, uh, we also, uh,
don't wanna be completely closed-minded, uh, closed-minded
to, uh, other views
and approaches that at first glance may struggle
to meet a western paradigm of, of science at first glance
and, and warrant that, that further scrutiny.
Um, but at the end of the day, uh, the science still needs
to be e evidence-based and data driven.
Cool. Uh, supplementary from Bert Davidson.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair, we've talked a lot about, um,
people in the science sector leaving,
do you have any sense of the numbers?
No, it's like that, uh, we don't do exit interviews, um,
at the, uh, at the airport for want of a better word.
'cause there's been other, um, careers
where I've also been interested how many
nurses are actually leaving.
And it's, it's not as, it's not as easy,
not as easy to determine.
Um, so no, I don't have a sense of that.
I don't know Danette
or, um, Carolyn, if you do, I'm sorry,
I don't have an answer for
That. There's a risk there
then, isn't there?
If we don't know if, if we are going
through this major restructure, we don't know
how many people are leaving with the skills that we need.
So when we are in our new PRO form, we, we are gonna be,
We we'll get a sense of that from our, our outputs
and our outcomes as
to whether we're achieving the outputs and
Outcomes. That's, that's up fairly
late in the process to find out.
So, yeah. Um, alright. So the minister has said
that the minister doesn't know, um,
so Scott will, supplementary,
Supplementary, thank you.
There are substantial cuts signal
to the Strategic Science Investment Fund that,
that invest in those strategic platforms
and infrastructure, including data.
How can we, how can we preserve the functionality of areas
that would be really difficult to rebuild?
And we've already heard about sensors, not
minister's responsibility,
but what assessment has been done of areas that
that risk becoming difficult
or impossible to rebuild once we break those,
those, those pathways.
Yeah. Like national collections and that sort of thing.
Yeah, that's really important. We, we, we've taken
that into account at great depth as have the boards.
Uh, I mean everything's important, but, but,
but what is unique and critically important, like some
of the national collections and substantively, uh,
they will be retained mostly, uh, with their home-based riss
as they move into pros.
So that expertise, uh, will still stay around that.
But yes, to answer your wider question,
we certainly take those sorts of things into account.
Uh, Excellent.
And it was probably back on the previous question,
is a scientific workforce very internationally competitive
and therefore come and go in
and out of, of New Zealand, given probably some
of your personal experience?
Yes. We, we do have a, a, a mobile, uh, science workforce
and, uh, on, on one level, that's not a bad thing to be able
to reach offshore and develop skills that may
or may not be available here.
Of course, we want 'em to repatriate back here.
That's the, the, the closing of the loop
that we'd, we'd like to achieve.
But to the members point here, either, uh,
a a a mass leaving of that knowledge
and expertise doesn't serve, uh, our needs in agenda either.
So we want sort of basically
to have our cake and eat it too.
Uh, we want to have the skills that are here,
but we want 'em to benefit from
what international experience
and collaboration can also give them. Mm-hmm.
Uh, so going, uh, to, to Rubin Davidson.
Yeah. How do you know they're mobile workforce?
Uh, because if we look at some of the, uh, demographics
for a, a part of the, uh, science workforce, uh, uh,
a number of them can be in a younger demographic,
which is more mobile almost by definition.
Um, and you know, I also hear from, uh,
colleagues in the sector, uh,
who describe those who are coming and going.
So I have a, a hands-on, uh, experience of that also.
So it's with that sort of, um,
experience that I make that statement,
Do you have any sense, 'cause,
'cause mobile can mean a few things mm-hmm.
Mobile can mean moving away from, do you have any sense
of the percentage moving away
versus the percentage coming back?
No, it ask that same, same question.
I can't, can't measure that.
Ally, back to the same question. Um,
there is a new question, uh, Scott Willis.
Thank you. Um, so we've heard, we've heard that some
researchers have recently discovered that the,
there's been a, a cut two 31 million
Maori research fund, um, he fund,
and that was canceled at the last minute.
Blindsiding researchers blindsiding those people
that were already engaged in projects undermining Matran
Maori and our Kapa Maori, that Maori knowledge,
which is something that we should be proud of,
and something that is a u unique part of Tiara.
Something that I've, I've personally, when I, prior
to entering gov government had worked in partnership
with on research projects, what, what drove the government
to, to do this and, and, and,
and without any signal simply cancel
that $31 million fund in the middle of research projects
that had engaged community,
that had had had community participants,
um, you know, basic science happening in our communities.
So I may start that in pass to, um, to Danette.
Uh, the funds hadn't been, uh, allocated
and, uh, as we made our way through that,
it no longer aligned, uh, with the priorities,
but that funding will be retained
to enhance Maori capacity and capability.
So if I may, in what way did it not align
with government priorities?
Because those projects were live,
they were expecting additional funding to be allocated
and it was simply dropped. Well,
Correct.
I could clarify. They weren't actually active projects.
So the, the, um, the decision making process was
with Kahu was to make a call for proposals.
Then a shortlist
of three applicants were then given a small amount
of funding to develop further develop a proposal
that was an application for funding.
So we hadn't actually embarked on
funding research projects yet. Those
Applications. I, I
understand that, but what I, what I would like
the minister to explain and
and yourself perhaps, is that when, when the government
engages research and,
and puts out a request for proposals, it, it doesn't,
it doesn't pay for that, that side.
What it does is demand an awful lot of input from,
from the community, from, from researchers
and from wider community in preparing proposals
and doing a lot of work
and then decides it doesn't want it
because it's reprioritized.
Now that, that is a way of ensuring
that we lose trust in the wider research community
and does not in fact respect
that citizen science, that ang Maori science.
That the, the work that I see is critical
and that many of us understand is something that we have
that is unique to Alara.
So to talk to that, to that last point,
the key point I'd make is that, that
that $30 million is still retained from
Maori capacity and capability.
Um, so it wasn't well aligned with these proposals, uh,
but that funding is still there and still available.
And they were funded to do that work.
So they didn't, they, uh,
got $300,000 each per contract to do that work.
And then it was, and then it was cut.
And they were always, always with the understanding
that they needed to produce a research proposal
that was appropriate for, um, funding.
So not so much cut as the funding remains,
but uh, the different gateways to the next base,
uh, the, the last gate that would've, um,
seen an application for a proposal, uh,
going forward. It stopped at that point.
Correct. That's right. So,
So it was fully funded for the, it should not be out
of money, but, you know, decisions,
we often get many applications
and can only progress with those that, um, we feel align,
uh, with the going for growth.
So parallels with the pay equity equity.
So that's, that's been answered that the project in align
with the vision of the funding.
So going to a new primary, uh, to Davidson.
Thank you Madam Chair. I'm, I'm wanting
to revisit this gene technology regulator.
I know we had some problematic questions
and that's based last time,
but, um, I, I've got some really simple ones.
Um, how will, how will the regulator make decisions?
Who else will be involved in making those decisions
relating to gene technology?
Uh, so those provisions are still within the purview
of the committee examining the policies, uh,
around gene regulation.
So we don't know.
We don't know because the committee, uh, are still, uh,
contributing advice, uh,
in the select committee process towards that.
So how do you forecast budget for that?
Because, uh, you can look at, uh, the body of work
as it's understood
and, uh, you can look at international jurisdictions and uh,
and then make an informed assessment as to what the likely
a structure and cost associated with that structure will be.
There seems to, there seems to be a real rush here.
Uh, no, the counterfactual would be,
if we were progressing here
and we didn't have any funding, uh, for the regulator,
you'd be saying, where's the funding?
Uh, so we can't sort of win, win it both ways.
Uh, we are committed to progressing with, uh, advice
through, uh, parliamentary process and,
and to do that thoughtfully.
Alright, so members, uh, looks like our primary time
Sure.
Advisory Council. I wanted to ask a bit about that.
I see that it's 5.8 million put aside
for the next five years,
and I just wanted to know, how are you going
to decide who's going to be on the council?
What are the functions going to be
and actually, what's the purpose of the council?
Mm. So the purpose of the council is to, uh,
provide advice that's that Prime Minister's Council, uh,
to provide advice on the strategic direction, uh,
of the science reforms.
Uh, what is a high priority, what is maybe less
of a priority, uh, that provides some, some guidance, uh,
in support of the E-C-S-A-G
and the, um, science Sector Advisory Group, uh,
that provide, uh, high level advice as to
how we can fine tune
and point the science sector, uh,
certainly towards an economic growth agenda.
The, uh, the, uh, I'm the chair, the, uh,
deputy chair has been announced as the, um,
prime Minister Science advisor
and, uh, as have the other, other board members.
So, um, they'll have a really important role actually in the
science sector reforms,
and, uh, they should be able to look through, uh, to
where all science happens.
Certainly from my perspective, what I mean by
that is they'll look through into the most obvious, uh,
ground research institutes,
but also, uh, through into the university sector, which
through things like the Centers
of Research Excellence have a core science
component to that.
And so, um, we'll be, uh, utilizing them
to help guide the system, which is what a number
of other small advanced economies do as well.
They have this sentinel body
who can really gather their minds around what,
what is the direction of travel?
What, what does this look like? And maybe who does what?
And, uh, we think that's, that's what we're,
we're timely, uh, needing.
Mm-hmm. We go, uh, to Ruben for
New primary. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Um, we covered earlier and, but not in huge detail.
Invest NZ Mm.
So a large, um, what's the word?
We've been using reprioritization
of funds into Invest New Zealand.
Um, there's some, there's some concerns around the structure
of Invest New Zealand, and I guess the,
the most blunt criticism would be
that it's essentially a real estate
agency to sell the country.
Um, I guess from a science perspective, my questions, the,
there are around, if they're our ideas,
but they're developed
or explored with other people's money,
they become other people's ips.
So if you're really looking for economic growth,
it's using other people's money to sell off our best
and brightest ideas in science, innovation,
and technology, a smart plan.
So a lot of dots to join there,
but what, what I would say is, uh, the, uh, mission
and, uh, policy settings
around Invest New Zealand are actually with Minister McClay.
The funding is coming from this vote, the $40 million, uh,
but the policy settings are actually with Minister McClay.
So up on that mm-hmm.
Then what you're telling me is that you are a large chunk
of your ministerial budget,
and science is completely in the control
of a different minister in a different area,
and you don't have control over
It. Health Research Council,
uh,
minister Brown makes the strategic decision.
We fund it from our vote, but
Previously that money would've been invested
into your vote, into, into an area that you had
authority over as minister, and now it's not.
It's that, that's correct. And,
and now it's with a, a new entity, a a new set
of objectives with Minister McClay. So
Effectively as Minister for Science,
you have less money in this budget?
Uh, no. As we discussed initially, uh,
when we take into account the a hundred million in the
Elevate Fund, uh, in fact, uh, we are at least, uh,
more than what we were in previous budgets,
but it is also correct that, uh,
$40 million has been reprioritized out
of this budget into Invest New Zealand.
And you are comfortable with that?
Yes, I am. Okay. Scott Willis,
And Following on,
on my colleagues' question about Invest New Zealand,
it's receiving over 84 million to attract
multinational corporations, yet we don't know how
that's gonna promote and protect local innovation.
And I guess this is where, this is
where a minister's re responsibility comes in,
because if we wanna protect those smaller scale innovators,
how will the government protect foreign investment
priorities or prevent foreign investment priorities from
taking over New Zealand community driven science
and tech enterprises?
Uh, so again, from an Invest New Zealand, uh,
regulatory settings, uh, that is with Minister McLay,
but I can talk, uh, to wider intellectual property
and in the science system and, uh,
and make that comment, uh, that, uh, our intentions are
to build and support
and retain, uh, domestically, uh,
achieved intellectual property
and look to how we can advance that
through an economic growth agenda, uh,
at pace like other advanced economies do.
Yep. Done. Okay. And new primary from Rub.
Thank you, Madam Sheer, um, Gracefield, yeah.
Looks by all accounts, like it's up for sale.
Yep. Uh, grace Field's been a challenge, uh,
for multiple governments and, um,
and multiple, uh, administrations over many years.
And, um, we are looking at what the options are, uh,
around gracefield, um, as to, I mean, there'll be a spectrum
of options that retain it, retain part of it.
Uh, I mean, we're exploring exactly what
that means, uh, at the moment.
But, uh, Gracefield has, has been a challenge.
Um, I don't want to prejudice any, uh, discussions,
particularly commercial discussions that might be en route,
but yes, there's a spectrum of options for Gracefield
that are on the table Sure.
And a timeframe across exploring that spectrum.
Yeah. Uh, we'll get some early soundings back, uh,
in the next, uh, few weeks actually, so Yeah.
Could be gone by the end of the year.
Uh, well, it would depend on what
those soundings come back as. Sure.
Yeah. So previously, the local MP
who sits in your cabinet mm-hmm.
Has been a, um, vocal advocate for Gracefield
and the work that goes on there, not just
because it's in his electorate, but
'cause it's so crucial to New Zealand.
Uh, he, he continues to be a, a strong advocate, uh,
for his electorate as an elect.
Uh, excellent. Uh, electorate, mp, um,
but we're also all bound
by cabinet collective responsibility.
Alright. So looks like, um, yeah, new primary,
new primary, um, the
Science Advisory Council mm-hmm.
Where there was passing reference to it earlier.
Um, it's very old autonomy focus has a strong primary
industry focus, doesn't really embrace new economy,
innovation, technology.
Uh, my opening remarks, I talked to exactly that.
Our public research institutions focus on traditional areas
of strength, of limited ability
to respond to emerging opportunities.
I don't disagree with you. It's part of, uh, part of
what we're trying to, to fix.
Sure. So, supplementary.
So what, what are you doing proactively to fix that?
So, uh, there's a number of things.
Uh, the advanced PRO is the most obvious, uh,
emerging technologies entity, uh, and focus.
And, uh, through all of the, uh, riss now becoming pros,
uh, there's a real direction of travel to
how we can best use advanced
technologies, emerging technologies.
AI is a good example, um,
to further improve the research outputs, um, that we have.
So an agenda in the existing,
but, uh, the clear focus will be
through the advanced technology PRO
to pick up the emerging technologies,
Uh, supplementary from Dr.
Uni Winnick. Uh, thank you Minister.
Um, I guess along that line, just confirming,
would you agree that digital technology sector initiative
of 43, um, 0.8 odd million plus, um,
the, uh, an additional technology
and incubator program of 22.8 million, um,
shows quite a substantial, um, commitment from, uh, um,
government towards, um, those not less traditional, less,
um, primary sector based?
So, uh, continuing the digitalization, uh, agenda, uh,
for government, uh, both external
and internal, uh, is an important part of our piece of work.
And again, I've used our AI has,
but one example as to, um, how, uh, we are looking to, uh,
step up what we do in a safe and considered way.
Uh, how we can better use, uh, artificial intelligence both
inside government organizations,
how we can send those signals out
to non-government organizations.
That is an important piece of work that we're working on.
Thank you. New primary, new primary,
Um, the Prime Minister's science prize mm-hmm.
$5 million. Mm-hmm. Any plans to increase that?
Not actively under consideration.
Seems, it seems quite low to me.
Oh, that's a number. I, I wouldn't trifle
with $5 million take you a while to earn 5 million, but, uh,
You gave a hundred times that to, um, big tech in a,
by not pursuing a app tax, so
could have given a hundred times that
to Prime Minister Science
Prize. Could have done a lot
of things but didn't.
Uh, I think it's a, uh, a, a, a prize that we were happy
to support and we're very pleased to see, uh,
the people on the night and, and,
and hear of their marvelous work.
I think the Premier prize winner was Ag Research,
as I recall, on end of fight, uh, work, uh, in grasses,
which by itself has contributed millions
and millions of dollars, uh, to the New Zealand economy
through, through better grazing management.
So a impressive piece of work, pretty
Much just in that space of, of some of our, our best
and brightest, some of our pioneers in the
sites innovation tech space.
Mm-hmm. Did you attend the High Tech Awards?
Uh, no, I did not. So there were a number
of comics made at those awards by recipients of awards
that were less than favorable to the current direction
of travel of the government around
funding their various sector.
And in fact, name checked in a number of instances
that the very things that they were winning prizes
for would only have happened and could only happen
because of investments that are no longer taking place.
Uh, look, uh, I'm sure a number of them have, uh, written
to me or written to the office.
Uh, so I am, am aware of, uh, concerns in the sector of, of
that, of that nature.
Um, and I'll take all those concerns into account.
Did you attend the Mako Awards?
Uh, no, I did not. So those In Maori Innovation Awards,
Uh, but a, a number of awards where
for scheduling conflicts, I'm unable to attend.
I do send a recorded video. Alright.
A new primary from Scott Willis. Thank you.
Um, the work of the Science Sector Advisory group
and the University advisory group was made more challenging
by the delivery of the reports so
that they could be considered together.
Um, and how will the future of universities
and their funding be integrated with the obvious benefits of
removing that dysfunctional competitive element
or mechanisms to make the pros more
accountable, more effective?
Uh, so, uh, we are very interested,
as I'd already mentioned, in the main science actors, uh,
collaborating more.
And so, uh, certainly, uh, through this vote, uh,
towards universities, um, we've sent clear signals
that, uh, science collaboration, uh, is advantageous
and something that we are encouraging.
I also mentioned before, but it's not actually in this vote,
but I can probably talk to it, um,
because I'd already mentioned it, the Centers
of Research Excellence, which have, as one
of their agendas collaboration between universities
and, uh, the science sector.
I'd also mentioned before the initiatives
where we've already undertaken, uh, around how we can get
important research infrastructure collaboration, uh,
through government research institutes, uh,
and through universities.
So just further examples of, of collaboration
between those two, that'll be really
important, actually getting that working.
Okay. And, um, yep.
We do know, I think all of us agree that productivity,
low productivity has long been a feature of New Zealand, um,
economy, and that in all advanced
economies or societies with, with a research element that
in high production it is aligned with
at least 2% of GDT invested in, in research.
When do you think we will achieve that in New Zealand?
Is there a, is there a pathway to actually fund
what is needed to build a healthy science ecosystem in TR?
Uh, look, I think, uh, all, all of us, uh, would agree
that, uh, if, if we can, uh, place funding, uh,
into science, uh, new funding into science, uh,
that, that's a good thing.
What I've already said though, is to do that
and we need a system that's robust, uh, that has, uh,
adequate, uh, reporting and accountability mechanism.
We need to do that first. We need to do at pace.
We can't spend a lot of time figuring that out or,
or there'll never be new money coming into the system.
Totally acknowledge, uh, where we are, a very small
increase, uh, from previously reported, uh,
contributions compared to OECD of what we spend
as a proportion of GDP on science.
Yes, we would all, would all like to advance that.
And, uh, you know, you can anticipate that as we, uh,
have discussions through various budget bids that, uh, any,
uh, science minister, uh,
should be raising those same questions.
So to that point, the minister appears to be saying
that when things are perfect, it'll be funded better.
No, no, I'm not saying that at all.
What I actually said was, we can't afford to wait.
Um, for, you know, we can't let the, what is it?
The, the, the great be the enemy of good.
Um, we, we need to, uh, be, be progressing, um,
significantly and, and with some degree of, of
Base, right?
Is it a sub dimension? One,
It does appear, and I think we are returning to, uh,
questions earlier about the transition from RIS to PR pros.
The, the, um, the funding
or the ability for us to develop
that healthy science ecosystem does depend on the successful
transition and maintaining capability
and expanding that skill base.
When the signals we are getting from the sector is
that the opposite is happening, that we are losing
that skill base, we are losing that capability
because of the uncertainty.
So wouldn't it be more sensible for the, for the minister
to consider resourcing that transition effectively to manage
that transition smoothly so we can move at pace?
Uh, I, I would put to you
that we are effectively resourcing it
and, uh, the example I've give is the, the enthusiasm
that C i's had, uh, to merge, uh, into the, uh,
conglomerations that we've, that we've proposed.
Um, I, I accept some of the points you're making.
Change always creates uncertainty
and with uncertainty people can make different choices.
Uh, i, I accept that.
Um, but, uh, by one July we'll have formed the, uh,
three pros, uh, initially and, um, they're excited
and I'm excited for them as well. Mm-hmm.
Uh, new primary from Ruben Davidson.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, mor
to fellow Kyle Heim said the reforms
to Crown research institutes are like trying
to make more lemonade by squeezing used
lemons slightly harder.
I think from the questions and answers today, you
and I would have differing opinions on that,
but one of the things we do know is
that these are complex changes
and there's been a lot of reprioritization of funds moving
around to be able to do that.
It's very difficult to unpick the knitting to be able
to work out exactly what's moved where,
and there's differing views on how much has been cut
or reprioritized in different places.
So I guess my final question is really a request to, as part
of post this hearing today, have a table that shows
where and how the money has moved around in this vote.
Sure. I'm sure that's something that the team,
um, team can produce for you. Yep.
Thank you. Yep. So that's good.
Um, final question, Scott, final question. Thank you.
So final question.
Um, the, um, the parliamentary commissioner
for the environment has taken the exceptional step
of writing to the Prime Minister about his concerns about
changes to our science system.
Mm-hmm. What is the minister's response
and what, what consideration has been taken to
the PCEs letter
and what, uh, what, what, what has the minister been doing
to address the concerns that the parliamentary commissioner
for the environment has expressed both
to the minister and to the Prime Minister? That's
Right. Yeah. Yeah. I, I
received, um, the letter as well.
Uh, so I've spoken with the parliamentary commissioner
and, um, we have taken, uh, the points that he has made, uh,
into account many times and, uh,
and looked at, uh, what, uh, was a way forward to, uh,
address his concerns.
And then what I'll also say is that even once the,
so not all his concerns will be addressed in the formation
of CROs from cs,
but, uh, what I am saying is that, uh,
that is not the conclusion of some
of the important questions that he raises that, uh,
will continue, uh,
to look in the ly example we're talking about is
that we might, this particular piece of expertise be set.
That was, that was one of the, uh,
questions he was particularly, uh, concerned with.
And, um, what we'll do is, uh, will progress with the, uh,
merger of the Riss,
but that is still an open discussion in my mind as to
where those, uh, those entities
and those services are, are best
place. Do you have any comments on
That? Yeah, if I may minister,
um, the, the,
the Parliamentary Commission for Environment, um, uh, was,
was concerned to align so, uh, to, to to ensure
that the right capability was sitting in, uh,
resting in the right institution.
Um, and he had, uh, approached it with a number of lenses.
One was a regulatory lens, one was a, a geographical lens,
and, uh, had a view that, uh, there were a number
of scientific capabilities that would be best sitting in
earth sciences that we're currently in bio economy.
Uh, we were very open when we set this up.
We were very open to future changes
and indeed the legislation that will come
through in due course we'll allow, uh, flexibility
and change in the future as well.
What we did was we asked the bioeconomy
and earth sciences science leaders to, uh, ask themselves
that very question and ask themselves is there any science
that would be better sitting in another institution?
And, uh, but the lens we had given them was of,
uh, similar capabilities.
We're trying to bring capabilities together
for effectiveness gain.
Uh, the rules were very simple.
If any one of you thinks there's a case to be heard, then
that comes back to the Center
for Ministerial decision making.
So if any one of them had said actually on balance,
we think this thing in Money UA could go to Earth Sciences
or something like that, then it was a call in, it was coming
to us and the minister would've made a decision.
They didn't. When they took that, uh,
associated science capability lens, they actually came
to the conclusion that the current
distribution was effective.
Now, uh, with one large exception around agriculture, uh,
which is a process, we will be running a due course
for the minister, if in future capabilities should shift
because the system needs them to,
and to be more effective somewhere else,
the legislation will allow for that.
Alright. So members, we, is it a very quick subject?
Very, very, very quickly.
The other part of the PCA's concern I understand was data
was, was how do we maintain that strength and data.
Mm-hmm. And particularly in environmental reporting,
Uh, we're, we're working on that.
Um, and we've taken that consideration into account and,
and given it, uh, due seriousness
across multiple agencies actually.
So yes, we, we take that onto account and we're working on
That. Alright,
thank you so much, minister. Thank you.